Delft University of Technology

Introduction to bed, bank and shore protection

Revised edition

Schiereck, G.J.; Verhagen, H.J.

Publication date

2019

Document Version

Final published version

Citation (APA)

Schiereck, G. J., & Verhagen, H. J. (2019). Introduction to bed, bank and shore protection: Revised edition.
Delft Academic Press.

Important note

To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).

Please check the document version above.

Copyright

Otter than for strictly personal use, its not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy

Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.

We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.


Introduction to
bed, bank and shore protection


Cover:

“De machtige grijper, overwinnaar in den strijd tegen de zee” (The mighty grab, victor
of the battle against the sea).

Johan Hendrik van Mastenbroek (1875 - 1945), Oil on canvas, Zuiderzeemuseum,
Enkhuizen, The Netherlands.


Introduction to
bed, bank and shore protection
Gerrit Jan Schiereck
updated by Henk Jan Verhagen
Delft Academic Press / VSSD


© Delft Academic Press / VSSD

Revised edition 2019

Published by Delft Academic Press / VSSD

Leeghwaterstraat 42, 2628 CA Delft, The Netherlands
www.delftacademicpress.nl/f007.php

dap@vssd.nl

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.

Hardcover edition: ISBN 97890-6562-4413

NUR 956

Keywords: shore protection.


A little learning is a dangerous thing;
Drink deep or taste not the Pierian spring.
Alexander Pope (1688-1744)
Preface
Every book is unique. This one is because of a combination of two things:
«the coverage of subjects from hydraulic, river and coastal engineering which
are normally treated in separate books
© the link between theoretical fluid mechanics and practical hydraulic
engineering.
On the one hand many fine textbooks are available on fluid motion, wave
hydrodynamics etc. while on the other hand one can find many manuals on hydraulic
engineering topics. The link between theory and practice is seldom covered, making
the use of manuals without understanding the backgrounds a "dangerous thing". Using
a cook book without having learned to cook is no guarantee for a tasty meal and
distilling whisky without a thorough training is plainly dangerous. Manuals are often
based on experience, either in coastal or river engineering, or they focus on hydraulic
structures such as weirs and sluices. In this way the overlap and analogy between the
various subjects is missed which is a pity, especially in non-standard cases where
insight into the processes is a must. This book makes an attempt to bridge the gap
between theoretical hydrodynamics and the design of protective structures. The
imagination and visualisation of what happens at an interface between soil and water
is one of the key aspects to be learnt. However, this can only partly be derived from a
text book. Using one's eyes every time one is on a river bank, a bridge or a beach is
also part of this process. In the same sense a computer program should never
completely replace experimental research and every student who wants to become a
hydraulic engineer should spend some time doing experiments whenever the
possibility presents itself. Anyway, the purpose of this book is to offer some know-
how, but even more importantly, some know-why.
The painting on the cover represents three major elements in
si, protection against water. The inset right under pictures the power
of water, symbolised by Neptune who is enthousiastically trying to
enter the gate while money and knowledge, symbolised by Mercury
7 274 Minerva, respectively, are the means to stop this. The painting
=),¢ itself depicts the granting of the right to establish an administrative
Leake body by the people of Rhineland, a polder area, by the count of
Holland in 1255. People's participation is always a major issue in
hydraulic engineering, as most projects serve a public goal. People's participation and


vi INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
money is not what this book offers, but I do hope that it will contribute to the
knowledge to be able to make durable and sustainable protections.
Gerrit Jan Schiereck, Dordrecht, December 2000
Preface to the 2nd edition
The main reason to make a 2" edition of this book was that we run out of copies. The
basic setup of the book has not been changed. Also the fundamentals did not change
in the last decade. Some new findings on turbulence have been added; the chapters on.
execution have been updated to the latest level of technology. Also a number of new
examples from the last decade have been included. Finally the
book is again in line with the latest standards. To indicate that
z A this is a new version of the book a new cover has been designed.
On the first cover an allegoric painting from the office of the
waterboard of Rhineland was shown. For this edition I have
> selected a painting of Mastenbroek (1932) depicting the closure
of the Afsluitdijk. A situation where the stability of the bed
nose material was essential for the completion of the works. The
as painting expresses the strength of the grab, needed to combat the
strength of the water.
Henk Jan Verhagen, Delft, July 2012
Preface to the 2nd edition, third revision
And again we ran out of copies, the book remains popular! As I am now the third
lecturer updating the book, I did not feel like adding too much after having been a few
years at TU Delft — and the basic hydraulics still have not changed. However, when
reprinting, we took the liberty to correct several mistakes and make textual
improvements in many parts. Only one important topic has been added, in Appendix
C: scaling rules for physical modelling. This tool remains the primary source for the
knowledge on bed, bank, and shore protections. | therefore feel it is important that the
basics on scaling rules are part of the book.
Bas Hofland, Delft, September 2019


1. INTRODUCTION vil
Acknowledgement
It is impossible to compile a book like this without the help of many people. In
alphabetical order, we want to thank for their major or minor, but always important,
contributions: Kees d' Angremond, Alessandro Antonini, Alice Beurze, Jeroen van den
Bos, Henri Fontijn, Pieter van Gelder, Johan Krook, Coen Kuiper, Mark Lindo, Jelle
Olthof, Jacques Oostveen, Kristian Pilarezyk, Hermine Schiereck, Jacques Schievink,
Greg Smith, Wijnand Tutuarima, Wim Venis, Henk Jan Verhagen, Arnold Verruijt,
Dick de Wilde.
Trademarks
‘The use of trademarks in this publication does not imply any endorsement of
disapproval of this product by the authors or their employees.
The following trademarks used in this book are acknowledged:
Accropode —_Sogreah Consultants, France
Armourflex  Armourtec, USA
Basalton Holcim betonproducten by, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Elastocoast_ —_Elastogran GmbH, Lemforde, Germany (subsidiary of BASF)
Fixtone Heijmans Beton en Waterbouw, Rosmalen, Netherlands
Hydroblock —_Betonfabriek Haringman, Goes, Netherlands
Xbloc Delta Marine Consultants (BAM Infraconsult), Netherlands




Contents
Preface v
Preface to the 2nd edition vi
Preface to the 2nd edition, third revision vi
Contents ix
1 INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 How to look at protections 2
1.1.1 Why and when 2
1.1.2 Design 3
1.1.3. Science or craftsmanship 5
1.2 How to deal with protections 6
1.2.1 Protection against what? 6
1.2.2 Failure and design 9
1.2.3. Load and strength 12
13 How to deal with this book 16
2 FLOW -Loaps 19
2.1 Introduction 20
2.2 Turbulence 21
2.3 Wall flow 24
2.3.1 Uniform flow 24
2.3.2. Non-uniform flow 26
24 Free flow 28
2.4.1 Mixing layers 28
2.4.2 Jets 29
25 Combination of wall flow and free flow 31
2.5.1 Flow separation 31
2.5.2 Vertical expansion (backward-facing step) 32
2.5.3. Vertical constriction and expansion (sill) 33
2.5.4 Horizontal expansion 34
2.5.5 Horizontal constriction and expansion (groyne) 35
2.5.6 Detached bodies 36
2.6 Load reduction 38
2.7. Summary 39
2.8 APPENDICES 40
2.8.1 Basic equations 40
2.8.2 Why turbulence? 43
3 FLOW - STABILITY 47
3.1 Introduction 48
3.2 Uniform flow - horizontal bed 48


x INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
3.2.1 Basic equations 48
3.2.2 Threshold of motion 53
3.2.3. Stone dimensions 55
3.2.4 Waterdepth 56
3.2.5 Practical application 57
3.3. Sloping bed 59
3.4. Non-uniform flow 61
3.4.1 Acceleration 61
3.4.2 Deceleration 64
3.43 Practical applications 68
3.44 A more fundamental approach 10
3.5 Coherent material 75
3.6 Summary 7
4 FLOW - ERosION 79
41 Introduction 80
4.1.1 Scour as sediment transport 80
4.1.2. The scour process 82
4.2 Scour without protection 84
4.2.1 Scour in jets and culverts 84
4.2.2 Scour around detached bodies 85
4.2.3 Scour around attached bodies and in constrictions 89
43 Scour with bed protection 91
4.3.1 Scour development in time 92
43.2 Factor a 92
43.3 Protection length and roughness 95
4.3.4. Varying conditions 96
43.5 Equilibrium scour 96
4.3.6 Stability of protection 98
4.4 Summary 101
5 POROUS FLOW — GENERAL 103
5.1 Introduction 104
5.2 Basic equations 105
5.2.1 General 105
5.2.2. Laminar flow 107
5.3 Stability of closed boundaries 109
5.3.1 Impervious bed protections 109
5.3.2 Impervious slope protections 110
5.4 Stability of open boundaries 114
5.4.1 Heave and piping 114
5.42 Micro-stability of slopes 117
5.5 Macro stability of slopes 120
5.6 Load reduction 123


CONTENTS xi

5.7 Summary 125
6 POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 127
6.1 General 128
6.2 Granular filters 130
6.2.1 Introduction 130

6.2.2 Geometrically closed filters 131

6.2.3 Geometrically open filters 133

6.3 Geotextiles 139
6.3.1 Introduction 139

6.3.2 Retention criteria 140

6.3.3. Permeability criteria 141

6.3.4 Overall stability 143

6.3.5 Survivability and durability 144

6.4 Summary 144
7 WAVES - Loaps 147
7A Introduction 148
7.2 Non-breaking waves 149
7.2.1 General 149

7.2.2 Shear stress 153

7.3 Breaking waves 156
7.3.1 General 156

7.3.2. Waves ona foreshore 159

7.4 Waves on slopes 161
74.1 General 161

7.4.2 Run-up and run-down 163

7.43  Overtopping 166

7.44 Wave impact 169

75 Load reduction 169
7.6 Summary 171
7.7. APPENDICES 172
7.7.1 Linear wave theory 172

7.7.2 Wave statistics 176

7.13 Wave generation 181

8 WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 185
8.1 Erosion 186
8.1.1 Erosion of slopes 186

8.1.2 Bottom erosion 187

8.1.3 Wave scour around detached bodies 188

8.2 Stability general 190
8.3 Stability of loose grains 193
8.3.1 Bed stability under wave loading 193


xii INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
8.3.2. Slope stability under wave loading 194
8.3.3 Other aspects 201
8.4 Stability of coherent material 202
8.4.1 Placed-block revetments 202
8.4.2 Interlocking blocks 208
8.4.3. Generalised approach 209
8.4.4 Impervious layers 212
8.5 Material quality 215
8.6 Summary 216
9 SHIPS 219
9.1 Introduction 220
9.2 Loads 222
9.2.1 Limit speed 222
9.2.2 Primary waves 224
9.2.3. Secondary waves 227
9.2.4 Propeller wash 230
9.3. Stability 235
9.3.1 Primary waves 235
9.3.2 Secondary waves 235
9.3.3 Propeller wash 236
9.4 Erosion 238
9.5 Summary 239
10 DIMENSIONS 241
10.1. General 242
10.2 Probabilistics 244
10.2.1 Introduction 244
10.2.2 Comparison of methods 246
10.2.3 Level III 249
10.2.4 Level II 252
10.2.5 Level I 254
10.2.6 Evaluation 254
10.3. Maintenance 256
10.3.1 Introduction 256
10.3.2. Maintenance policies 256
10.3.3 Probabilistic approach of inspection 258
10.4 Failure mechanisms 261
10.4.1 Introduction 261
10.4.2 Systems 261
10.4.3 Fault trees 262
10.4.4 Examples 264
10.5 Summary 266
10.6 APPENDIX: Probabilistic approach Level II 267


CONTENTS xiii

11 PROTECTIONS 273
11.1 Introduction 274
11.2 Bed protections 275
11.2.1 General 275

11.2.2 Loose rock 275

11.2.3 Fascine mattresses 277

11.2.4 Composite mattresses 279

11.2.5 Evaluation 282

11.2.6 Piers 283

11.3 Bank protections 284
11.3.1 Revetments 284

11.3.2 Loose rock 284

11.3.3 Composite mattresses 284

11.3.4 Rigid structures 286

11.3.5 Groynes 286

11.4 Shore protection 289
11.4.1 Revetments and dikes 289

11.4.2. Groynes and breakwaters 294

11.4.3 Breakwaters 294

11.5 General aspects revetments 296
11.5.1 Choice 296

11.5.2 Transitions 297

11.5.3 Toes 298

12 NATURAL PROTECTIONS 303
12.1 Introduction 304
12.1.1 General 304

12.1.2 Ecology 305

12.1.3 Load and strength 310

12.2 Bed protections 311
12.2.1 General 311

12.2.2 Fascine mattresses 311

12.3 Bank protections 312
12.3.1 General 312

12.3.2 Vegetation 313

12.3.3. Vegetation with reinforcing mats 316

12.3.4 Load reductors 317

12.4 Shore protections 319
12.4.1 Mangroves 319

12.4.2 Load reduction 324

12.4.3 Grass dikes and revetments 325

12.4.4 Design based on ecology 328


xiv INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
13 CONSTRUCTION 331
13.1 Introduction 332
13.2. Equipment 332
13.2.1 General 332
13.2.2 Land based equipment 333
13.2.3 Waterborne equipment 336
13.3 Bed protections 338
13.3.1 Loose rock 338
13.3.2 Fascine mattresses 339
13.3.3 Prefabricated mats 342
13.4 Bank protections 343
13.4.1 Revetments 343
13.5 River groynes 349
13.6 Shore protections 350
13.6.1 Dikes 350
13.6.2 Groynes and breakwaters 352
13.7 Quality assurance 355
13.7.1 General 355
13.7.2 Tolerances 356
APPENDIX A MATERIAL PROPERTIES 359
A.1 Block weight and size 360
A2 — Geotextiles 366
A.3  Gabions 371
AA Physical properties of soil 372
APPENDIX B EXAMPLES 377
B.1 Bank protection along a river mouth 378
B.2 Caisson closure 383
B.3 Breakwater 393
APPENDIX C PHYSICAL MODELLING 401
Introduction 401
Scaling of hydrodynamics 401
LIST OF SYMBOLS 405
REFERENCES 411
Ph.D. and M.Sc. theses from Delft University of Technology and other research
reports from TU Delft 411
Other references 412
INDEX 417


1 INTRODUCTION
a “ — —
<_<. oS
cs 9 a
5 “ ae RN iS
: ee Bt. A
% a army Sata Lae =
ic . we Ss a 3
= ae és ste . . i”
; — “ a x
bx ¥ E —~
es 4 —— pe
SOS Vite ae: Te
Coastal protection along the Javanese coastline (photo Verhagen)


2 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
1.1 How to look at protections
1.1.1 Why and when
The interface of land and water has always played an important role in human
activities; settlements are often located at coasts, river banks or deltas. When the
interface consists of rock, erosion is usually negligible, but finer material can make
protection necessary. In a natural situation, the interface moves freely with erosion and
sedimentation. Nothing is actually wrong with erosion, unless certain interests are
threatened. Erosion is somewhat like weed: as long as it does not harm any crop or
other vegetation, no action is needed or even wanted. There should always be a balance
between the effort to protect against erosion and the damage that would occur
otherwise.
A ° “
\ 3 measured position
\ {S| __ of coastline (A-A)
present coastline \, a S
\
SJ ‘ ~~
\ |
SL \ sand ridge
aoe
sandridge A gan gga anna
a 1900 1950 2000
Figure 1-1 To protect or not to protect, that's the question

Figure 1-1 shows cyclic sedimentation and erosion of silt (with a period of many
decades) seaward of a natural sand ridge. In a period of accretion people have started
to use the new land for agricultural purposes. When erosion starts again, the question
is whether the land should be protected and at what cost. Sea-defences are usually very
costly and if the economic activities are only marginal, it can be wise to abandon the
new land and consider the sand ridge as the basic coastline. If a complete city has
emerged in the meantime, the decision will probably be otherwise. With an ever
increasing population, the pressure on areas like these also increases. Still, it is good
practice along a natural coast or bank to build only behind some set-back line. This
set-back line should be related to the coastal or fluvial processes and the expected
lifetime of the buildings. For example, a hotel has a lifetime of, say 50 years. It should
then be built at a location where erosion will not threaten the building within 50 years,
see Figure 1-2. So, in fact the unit for a set-back line is not meters but years! These
matters are Coastal Zone Management issues and are beyond the scope of this book.


—SSSSSSSSSsSNTRODUCTION, OCS
expected erosion
in 50 years
a a
_---77 | set-back line
Figure 1-2 Building code in eroding area
Besides erosion as a natural phenomenon, nature can also offer protection. Coral reefs
are excellent wave reductors. Vegetation often serves as protection: reed along river
banks and mangrove trees along coasts and deltas reduce current velocities and waves
and keep the sediment in place. Removal of these natural protections usually mark the
beginning of a lot of erosion trouble and should therefore be avoided if possible. So, a
first measure to fight erosion, should be the conservation of vegetation at the interface.
Moreover, vegetation plays an important role in the ecosystems of banks. Chapter 12
deals with these aspects and with the possibilities of nature-friendly protections.
Finally, it should be kept in mind that, once a location is protected along a coast or
riverbank that has eroded on a large scale, the protected part can induce extra erosion
and in the end the whole coast or bank will have to be protected. So, look before you
leap, should be the motto.
A lot of cases remain where protection is useful. Figure 1-3 gives some examples of
bed, bank and shore protections. Along canals, rivers and estuaries, bank protection is
often needed to withstand the loads caused by flow, waves or ships. Shore protection
structures include seawalls, revetments, dikes and groynes. Bed protection is necessary
where bottom erosion could endanger structures, like bridge piers, abutments, in- or
outlet sluices or any other structures that let water pass through.
storm surge level
Ee
dike protection
w Osi eres = scour
= inlet sluice bottom protection \hole__
Figure 1-3 Examples of protection
1.1.2 Design
Protections of the interface of land or soil and water are mostly part of a larger project:
e.g. a navigation channel, a sea defence system, an artificial island or a bridge.
Therefore, the design of a protection should be tuned to the project as a whole, as part
of an integrated design process. In general it can be said that the resulting design should


4 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
be effective and efficient. Effective means that the structure should be functional both
for the user and the environment. This implies that the structure does what it is
expected to do and is no threat for its environment. Efficient means that the costs of
the (effective) structure should be as low as possible and that the construction period
should not be longer than necessary.
A design that combines effectiveness and efficiency can be said to be “value for
money” The intended value becomes manifest in the terms of reference (ToR) which
contains the demands for a structure. This ToR has to be translated into concepts
(possible solutions). Demands and concepts do not match one to one and a fit between
the two is to be reached with trial and error. Promising concepts are engineered and
compared. One comparison factor, of course, is costs. The designer’s task to get value
for money can be accomplished by compromising between four elements, see Figure
1-4.
— —— > e_—_ a -_
<— <— <— gh
Figure 1-4 Value for money

The design process is of a cyclic nature because it is impossible to go directly from
left to right in Figure 1-4. In the first phase, the designer works with a very general
notion of the ToR and with some concepts in mind, based on his own or others’
experiences. An integrated design process starts with a rough approach to all four
elements in Figure 1-4, refining them in subsequent design phases. Effectivity can be
evaluated in terms of functionality, environment and technology, while efficiency is
expressed in terms of costs and construction although, of course, there are several
overlaps and links between these aspects. They all play a role in each of the design
phases, but the focus gradually shifts as indicated in Figure 1-5.

Initiative

Feasibility study Functionality Environment Costs

Provisional design | 2

t
aii Technology Construction
Detailed design
Figure 1-5 Focus during design process

Level of detail
In any project it is possible to discern various levels of detail. It is good to be aware of
the level of detail one is working on and to keep an eye on the adjacent levels, An
example of these levels (other divisions are, of course, possible):
1. System (Macro level)
2. Components (Meso level)
3. Parts (Mini level)


1. INTRODUCTION 5
4. Elements (Micro level)
Examples of the macro level are e.g. a coastal zone, a water system (river, lake etc.) a
harbour or a polder. On the meso level, one can think of components like a sea defence
(dike, sea wall etc.), a river bank, a breakwater, a closure dam or an outlet sluice. On
the mini level we look at dike protections, bank protections or bed protections. The
micro level, finally, consists of elements like stones, blocks etc. In this hierarchy, the
title of this book indicates that it treats subjects on the third level. Level 1 should
always play a role in the background, see e.g. Section 1.1.1. Level 2 will be treated
where and when adequate, while sometimes level 4 also plays a role e.g. when it comes
to defining stone sizes. As a consequence of these levels, it can be said that the design
of protections in a large project is usually more in the lower part of Figure 1-5, when
it comes to the technical development of a plan.
1.1.3 Science or craftsmanship
Protections of the interface of land and water have been made for more than 1000
years. Science came to this field much later, as a matter of fact very recently. The
second world war boosted the understanding of waves and coasts. In the Netherlands
after 1953, the Delta project had an impact on the research into protection works. In
the last decades, major contributions to the design practice have been made. Thanks to
new research facilities, like (large scale) wind wave flumes, (turbulent) flow measure-
ment devices, numerical models etc. progress has been made in the scientific basis of
our knowledge. But even after 50 years, much of the knowledge of these matters is of
an empirical nature. Most formulas in this book are also empirical, based on
experiments or experience.
Working with these empirical relations requires insight, in order to prevent
misconceived use. The idea underlying this book is to start with a theoretical approach
of the phenomena, focussing on understanding them. In the design of protections,
especially in the unusual cases, a mix of science and experience is required. Since
undergraduates, by definition, lack the latter, a sound theoretical basis and insight into
the phenomena is paramount. This book goes one step further than simply presenting
empirical design relations; it aims to create a better understanding of these relations.
Engineering is an applied science, which then, by definition, means that science is the
basis but not the core. Creativity, experience and common sense are just as important.
Computer models play an increasingly important role in engineering. For a hydraulic
engineer, however, a sheet of white paper and a pencil are still essential, especially in
the preliminary stage of a design. A hand made sketch of a current or wave pattern is
as valuable as the correct application of calculation rules. For both, a good insight into
the physics of the processes involved is indispensable.


6 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
1.2 How to deal with protections
1.2.1 Protection against what?
Interfaces between land and water exist in all sizes and circumstances. Figure 1-6 gives
an idea of typical values for the loading phenomena in various water systems (of course
it is always possible to find an example with different figures).
1. . . .
3
1 1 1 1
I I I I
2 I I I I
| | | |
I I I I
1 I I I I
I I I I
t | I | | |
0 I I I I
canals rivers estuaries seas lakes
~©- waterlevel fluctuations (m) -=-run-off velocities (m/s) —&- tide velocities (m/s)
+ wind waves (m) -©- ship waves (m)
Figure 1-6 Hydraulic conditions in water systems
This book treats the interface stability by looking at the phenomena instead of the water
systems. This is more exceptional than it seems, because most textbooks deal with
shore protection or river training works or navigation canals etc. Much of the
knowledge of these protection works is based on experience and experience is often
gained in one of the mentioned fields, not in all of them. This is a pity because many
of the phenomena involved are similar: ship waves and wind waves have different
sources, but behave very much the same. The same holds for flow in a river, through
a tidal closure or an outlet sluice, when it comes to protecting the bed or the bank.
Moreover, in river bank protections, wind waves can sometimes play a role, which is
often neglected in textbooks on river engineering. Therefore, an attempt is made to
find the physical core of all these related problems.
One thing protections have in common, is that their function is to withstand the energy
of moving water. Water in motion contains energy: currents, wind waves, ship move-
ment, groundwater-flow etc, which can become available to transport material. The
energy comes from external sources, like wind or ships, and eventually ends up as heat
by means of viscous friction. This is not an energy loss but an energy transfer, from
kinetic energy, via turbulence, to heat. Turbulence plays an important role and will be


1. INTRODUCTION 7
discussed in more detail in the next chapter. For now it is sufficient to say that
turbulence is related to the transformation of kinetic energy into heat. During this
transfer, turbulence contributes to the attack of the interface.

Hydraulic engineering research is often empirical and fragmented. This leads to an
avalanche of relations for each subject, while the connections remain unclear. One of
the basic ideas of this book is to show similarities and differences between the various
phenomena and therefore between the various formulas, in order to clarify the overall
picture. Chapter 2 deals with open-channel flow, Chapter 5 with porous flow (flow
through pores of granular structures like soil or rock), Chapter 7 with waves and
Chapter 9 with ships. These subjects can and will be treated separately, but there are
more similarities than many textbooks reveal.

SoS MA oe

SS

uniform flow tidal current orbital motion breaking wave

Figure 1-7 Flow and wave situations
Uniform flow is the starting point for many hydraulic considerations, see Figure 1-7.
The equilibrium between gravity and wall friction completely determines the flow.
The boundary layer, connected with the wall friction, takes up the whole waterdepth,
is turbulent and shows a logarithmic velocity profile. The velocity profile of tide waves
(very long waves with typical periods of 12 hours and wave lengths of several
hundreds of km's) only slightly differs from the uniform flow velocity profile. It is
therefore justified, when designing a protection, to consider tidal currents as a
succession of uniform flow situations with different velocities. For wind waves
(typical periods of 5 - 10s and wave lengths of 50 - 150 m), the situation is completely
different with a non turbulent orbital motion and a thin turbulent boundary layer,
although such a wave in very shallow water will again approach the situation with a
tidal wave. Finally, a wave that breaks on a slope, leads to turbulence over the whole
waterdepth.
a Ce a
—_t * —__( “wave celerity
— >
hydraulic jump bore
Figure 1-8 Jump and bore

A hydraulic jump and the roller of a broken wave (the bore) are very much the same.
This can be seen when the jump is observed from a fixed position and the bore from a
position that moves at wave celerity. The turbulence characteristics, caused by the
friction between roller and flowing water, are also similar. Chapter 7 will show this in
detail.


8 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
ri), {— ma aa
cylinder in flow moving ship
——_ Utau — Ue
==) et SD
— lop view
—_ U+w 7
Figure 1-9 Flowing water versus moving object
The same similarity exists between a fixed object in flowing water and a ship sailing
in still water. The water around the object accelerates, while around the ship a return
current occurs, both leading to a water level depression.
=
—>
—> (
wake jet
Figure 1-10 Mixing layers in wake and jet
Behind an object in flow or behind a ship, a wake occurs, where there is a velocity
deficit compared with the environment. This velocity difference causes a so-called
mixing layer where relatively slowly and quickly moving water mix which leads to a
lot of turbulence. In a jet (an outflow in stagnant or slowly moving water) the same
velocity differences (but now due to an excess velocity) occur, causing the same
mixing layer and turbulence.
The last analogy in this chapter is between pipe flow and porous flow (sce Figure 1-11)
which is flow through a porous medium like sand or stones. In a straight pipe the
(uniform) flow is determined by the wall friction. In an irregular pipe, uniform flow
will never really occur, due to the irregularities in the cross-section. Even with a
constant discharge, accelerations and decelerations will always occur and, at sharp
discontinuities, even flow separation with a mixing layer will take place. The flow
between grains, when considered on a micro level, also show continuous accelerations
and decelerations and the same basic equations describe this type of flow, including
laminar and turbulent flow. In practice, however, the flow is integrated over many
grains and pores, because it is not feasible and not necessary to have velocity
information of every pore.
=
ae Ms )
) ‘ } 4. é
7; ae
a f_—_——_—" News
pipe irregular pipe grain structure
Figure 1-11 Pipe flow and porous flow


1. INTRODUCTION 9
All of the above examples contain elements of three phenomena: wall flow, mixing
layer and oscillating flow (waves), with turbulence playing a role in all three of them.
Wall flow is present in uniform (pipe) flow, tidal flow and in the boundary layer of
wind waves. A mixing layer is visible in hydraulic jumps and bores (between main
flow and roller) and in wakes and jets. On a micro scale, porous flow includes both
wall flow and mixing layers. It is a simplification to say that every flow situation can
be reduced to these three basic phenomena or a combination of them but every
situation contains at least one of these three features. It is therefore indispensable to be
able to recognize and understand their elementary properties. This is what the chapters
on loads are about: Chapter 2 on flow, Chapter 5 on porous flow and Chapter 7 on
waves.
Hydraulics and geotechnics
In general, hydraulic and soil-mechanical mechanisms determine the stability of a
structure. Cause and effect can lie in both fields: failure of a protection can cause
settlements of a structure, but vice versa is also possible. Figure 1-12 gives some
examples.
In case (a) the sill under a water-retaining structure is a malfunctioning filter. Due to
erosion, the structure will settle. As the maximum gradient inside the filter possibly
occurs at the entrance side of the flow, the settlement can be against the head
difference. In case (b) a canal is situated above groundwater-level. To prevent water
losses, the bottom of the canal is coated with an impermeable protection. If the dike
along the canal settles, due to insufficient strength of the subsoil, a fracture in the
protection can occur and the canal water can drain into the subsoil. Case (a) looks like
a soil mechanical problem but it has a hydraulic cause while in case (b) it is the other
way around.

—a (@) erosion - settling (6) settling + leaking
| n
q average = ==
gradient foo ~
a — =
sand "\(possible) max. gradient
Figure 1-12 Cause and effect

1.2.2 Failure and design
The previous section already stressed that insight in phenomena is paramount for the
design of a reliable interface protection. Neglect of a relevant phenomenon can lead to
a protection that causes more damage than it prevents or that shifts the problem to the
neglected phenomenon, see Figure 1-13.


10 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Se ea ® =
WAG A
\
t A ae
Figure 1-13 Ill-designed protections
In case (a), large rocks have been dumped on a sandy bottom which erodes because of
currents. The rocks lead to a slightly lower velocity at the bottom, but to a considerable
increase in turbulence and hence, maybe even an increase of erosion. Case (b) shows
an asphalt-protection on a slope which would otherwise erode due to wave action. The
protection now causes a difference between the water-tables inside and outside of the
slope during low water. This head difference causes pressures on the protection which
can result in lifting the protection layer. It also causes a concentrated groundwater-
flow at the edge of the asphalt which leads to erosion at that spot.
Figure 1-14 shows the loads that act on a protected slope. A represents the loads from
the water-side of the interface, the external load due to waves and currents. C is the
load from inside due to a relatively high groundwater-potential in the soil-mass. B is
the interaction between the external load and the load inside of the structure. Although
the external forces are usually rather violent and spectacular, many protections fail
because of B or C.
strong
bE, a a OP
O A permeable (co)
Cc
sandtight
“es 93
flexible
Figure 1-14 Contradicting demands
The external load A requires a strong protection. This strength can be obtained by
using large, heavy stones. The example in Figure 1-13 has shown that a protection
should also be sand tight due to process B. To make the protection sand tight, some
layer is needed between the top-layer and the subsoil e.g. a filter, a cloth or a foil. But
if that layer is impermeable, C can become a threat. That means permeability can be
required (unless there are other reasons to make the protection impermeable; in that
case the protection has to be designed to withstand the possible pressures). Another
way of increasing strength is ensuring coherence in the top-layer e.g. by using concrete
or asphalt instead of dumped rocks. The protection can then become impermeable or
stiff which can cause problems if settlements are expected. So flexibility is another
factor to reckon with. Figure 1-14 gives an idea of the contradicting factors in design
of a protection.


1. INTRODUCTION 1

Failure mechanisms
In general, it is always necessary to keep the overall picture in mind. Figure 1-15 shows
the relevant failure mechanisms for a revetment.

ae ai QT

instability of protection wave overtopping toe erosion

instability of slope collision/agression subsidence

Figure 1-15 Failure mechanisms

Even if these mechanisms are not completely open to computation, a mere qualitative
understanding can help to prevent an unbalanced design. Insight is more important
than having an accurate formula to compute dimensions of some part of the structure.
Protections seldom fail because of an underestimation of the loads of 10 %,; most
protections fail because a mechanism has been neglected!
Sometimes, designers put most of their energy into the first failure mechanism, the
instability of the protection layer, also including the filter action (mechanism B in
Figure 1-14). But if the protection is too low, wave overtopping can destroy the
revetment. Toe protection is often neglected or underestimated. Instability of the slope
can be of a micro or macro nature, both connected with the slope angle; Chapter 5
gives more details on this. Collision or aggression is self evident, but hard to include
in a design. A collision-proof design will be unnecessarily expensive, unless the
protection is situated at a notorious accident spot. A better approach can be to keep
repair material in stock and to anticipate repair works in the maintenance programme.
The failure mechanisms of a structure can be combined in a fault tree (Figure 1-16),
which gives the relations between the possible causes and the failure of the revetment
on top of the tree. If you are able to assign probabilities to the events, it is possible to
determine the total probability of failure of the structure and to find weak spots. But
also without that quantitative information it is useful to draw a fault tree to get the
overall picture. An experienced designer does so intuitively but even then, it is a useful
tool.


12 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
failure of
a
| |
macro erosion
>>) instability — of slope «———)
micro | | Tinstab. of wave laggression
instability | protection overtopp. ‘ollision
T | j
| | | toe | subsi-
| | | erosion | dence
it _| a
(_ soil parameters - wave and current conditions - geometry _
Figure 1-16 Fault tree
1.2.3. Load and strength
The core item in this book is the design of protections that can withstand the loads due
to currents, water-level differences or waves. For structures consisting of relatively
small elements (rocks, stones, blocks etc.) the definition of strength is somewhat
ambiguous. A comparison with a steel structure is made to clarify this point (Figure
1-17).
fracture erosion
B| plastic 3
2 2h.
steel structure \ | granular structure
i elastic }
H )\inreshotd of
| max. load Motion
distortion transport, damage
Figure 1-17 Load and strength for steel and granular structure
When steel is loaded, at first the deformation is elastic, obeying Hooke's law. At a
certain point, without increase of the load, the deformation becomes plastic. After that,
some strengthening occurs until the steel yields. The strength of steel is normally
chosen well under the plastic limit, based on the statistics of the steel quality. The clear
change of material behaviour serves as an indicator for the permissible strength


1. INTRODUCTION 13
For a granular structure, things are less clear. When the load is small compared to the
strength, nothing happens at all. Ata certain load, some elements move and stop again
after some time. Further increase of the load leads to more displacements, finally
leading to complete erosion. Usually some damage, like the displacement of some
stones on a slope, is not much of a problem; this also depends on the maintenance
policy. A clear limit between acceptable and not-acceptable erosion is lacking and the
threshold of motion has to be defined. This will be done for the various phenomena in
the following chapters.
Another difference between steel and stones is that, for steel, both load and strength
can be expressed in the same unit: Newton. For a protection this could be achieved by
expressing the load on an individual stone in N and defining the strength as the weight
of that stone (massxg = N), but that is not very practical. It is customary to express the
load in terms of the wave height or the current velocity. The strength is then indicated
with a diameter or thickness, d, often as well as the relative density of the material [A
= (pm — pw)/pw], which contributes to the strength. This leads to dimensionless
parameters like H/Ad or w?/Agd.
This can lead to confusion because, in hydraulic engineering, these dimensionless
parameters are used both as mobility parameters and as stability parameters. The
difference becomes clear when you consider the mobility parameter as an independent
variable in a transport equation and the stability parameter as a dependent variable in
a stability equation:

Transport, damage = / (mobility parameter, geometry, etc)
Stability (parameter) =f (accepted damage, geometry, etc)

The first type of equation includes many sediment transport equations, e.g. in this book
the Paintal equation in Chapter 3 or, in a modified form, in scour relations in Chapter
4. Most relations in this book are of the second type, like those by Shields and Izbash
in Chapter 3 or those by Van der Meer and Hudson in Chapter 8. It is good to be aware
of the difference, as the use of these parameters in textbooks is not always consistent.
When used as a mobility parameter, a large value indicates more mobility (high load
versus low strength). When used as a stability parameter, a larger value of H/Ad
indicates more stability (the same stone size can resist a larger wave or for the same
wave, a smaller stone can be used). The stability parameter can be seen as a critical
value of the mobility parameter, since the amount of acceptable damage or transport
has been chosen. This may be confusing, but is essential in working with the different
formulas.


14 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
7 H/Ad as stability parameter
H/Ad as \ parameter,
H/Ad
damage
SS
Figure 1-18 Mobility versus stability
The difference can be illustrated by the stability of stones on a slope in breaking waves
(See Figure 1-18) based on the Van der Meer relations, see Chapter 8. In the H/Ad -
damage plane, H/Ad is a mobility parameter, in the H/Ad — a plane it is a stability
parameter. For a certain slope angle, @, and given stone dimensions (Ad), a higher
wave, hence a greater H/Ad, gives more mobility or more damage. For a certain
acceptable damage, a given stone (Ad) can stand higher waves when the slope is
gentler (smaller @). This has to do with gravity, which reduces the strength of a stone
on a steep slope, but also with the different behaviour of breaking waves on different
slope angles, resulting in different loads. This, again, illustrates that load and strength
are not defined unambiguously the way they are for a steel structure, when both can
be expressed in Newtons.
Example 1-1

A beach coast with a wave height of 3 m during a storm and sand with a grain size of 0.2

mm gives a H/Ad of about 10000. During that storm, a lot of sand will be transported. The

same wave height with a concrete caisson wall will give an H/Ad of less than 1 and no

movement at all. So, a higher value of the mobility parameter indicates less stability.

The same coast is going to be protected with stones on a slope. From experiments it is

found that the stability parameter for a slope 1:2 is about 2 (with hardly any movement of

stones) and for a slope 1:4 is about 2.5 (with the same degree of damage). With the given

wave height in a design storm of 3 m, this would lead to a stone size of 0.9 m for the 1:2

slope and 0.7 for the 1:4 slope. So, a higher value of the stability parameter indicates more

stability.
Load and strength as design options
When the load exceeds the strength and measures have to be taken, there are two
possible approaches: the strength can be increased or the load can be reduced. Figure
1-19 illustrates these possibilities. A bank, eroding due to wave action, can be
protected by making a revetment (case A) or by constructing a wave reductor in front
of the bank (case B). The latter can be chosen when the "natural" look of the bank has
to be preserved, see also Chapter 12.


1. INTRODUCTION 15
.
2] stable ,
{s
om Fl
wave reductor da
B unstable
di
load
Figure 1-19 Strength increase or load reduction

Load and strength statistics
Loads in nature show a lot of variation. Waves depend on wind, velocities in a river
depend on rainfall, so loads heavily depend on meteorology which has a random
character. Probabilistic design methods, therefore, are important for protections. In a
feasibility study it is often sufficient to work with a representative load. The choice of
that load should be based on the relevant failure mechanisms (see Figure 1-15) and on
the consequences of exceeding the load. Stability of the top layer of a bed protection
behind a sluice (e.g. see Figure 1-3) is mainly sensitive for exceptional loads and
should therefore be based on an extreme event, while erosion behind the protection is
also determined by everyday flow. The use of different exceedance frequencies results
in different design values for the same loading phenomenon!
More in general, the performance of a structure should be judged under various
circumstances related to different limit states, see e.g. Vrijling et al, 1992. Two widely
used limit states are:
Ultimate limit state (ULS): This limit state defines collapse or such deformation that
the structure as a whole can no longer perform its main task. It is usually related to
extreme load conditions. Related to the levels of Section 1.1.2, it can mean e.g. the
collapse of a dike (meso level). In the fault tree in Figure 1-16 the ULS is represented
by the higher part of the tree.
Serviceability limit state (SLS): This limit state defines the required performance,
e.g. the wave reduction by breakwaters in a harbour. In the context of this book it
describes a state that needs to be maintained. Related to the levels of Section 1.1.2 it
means e.g. a low damage level of a dike protection (mini level).
Note: for the top layer of the protection this could be seen as the ULS to show that
these definitions also depend on the level of detail. In Figure 1-16 the SLS is related
to the bottom part of the tree.
The accepted probability of reaching both limit states is a function of the damage
caused by exceeding that state. It is obvious that the chance of reaching the ULS should


16 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
be much lower than reaching the SLS. Maintenance policy is closely related to these
limit states. The strength of the structure as a whole can drop below the level that is
needed under extreme conditions (see Figure 1-20). As long as these conditions do not
occur, the ULS will not be reached. When deterioration goes on for a long time, the
strength can become too small even for daily conditions and collapse will occur out of
the blue. The extreme load in Figure 1-20 has some probability. When the strength is
greater than the extreme load, the probability of reaching the ULS is considered
acceptable. Without maintenance, the strength decreases and the failure probability
increases until it reaches about 100 % when the strength becomes lower than the ever
present loads. See Chapter 10 for more detail.

s strength with maintenance

@.| extreme load

B strength without

= | maintenance

J formal Toad” Riese ent saat
time
Figure 1-20 Strength as a function of time and maintenance

1.3 How to deal with this book
There are many textbooks on protection design. They are often aimed at professionals
and deal with specific practical applications without treating the theoretical
backgrounds. There are also many books on the theoretical backgrounds of flow and
wave phenomena without practical application. This book aims to introduce protection
design with a focus on the link between theory and practice. It is intended for use as a
textbook in a graduate course on university level. The reader is supposed to be familiar
with basic knowledge of hydraulics and soil mechanics; only the most important
elements thereof will be treated in this book.
Some engineers are addicted to formulas and computing. Formulas are indispensable
to calculate dimensions, but again, it is stressed that insight is often more important
than numbers. There are many formulas in this book, and of course, they are meant to
be used to calculate the dimensions of protections but there is also another way to look
at them. Formulas are a very special form of language; they are the most concise way
to express a phenomenon. By reading them carefully in this way, it is possible to gain
some insight because they show the relations between different parameters, thus
describing a phenomenon. The worst thing that can happen to a formula is to be learned
by heart without being understood. Another accident that can happen with a formula
is that it is considered algebra instead of physics. When doing so, cause and effect can
be interchanged freely, sometimes with funny computational results.


1. INTRODUCTION 17
The best way to read a formula is to start with the parameters. Firstly the exact
definitions of the parameters needs to be known. And next, do they seem logical for
the process described, are any parameters missing? When a parameter’s value doubles,
what happens to the result and does that seem reasonable? What is the domain in which
the formula is valid? Empirical relations are only valid in the range of experiments;
theoretical formulae are often based on simplifications.
Another essential element in the book is made up of pictures. These too, present a
concise language, either by means of "real life" pictures of some phenomenon or by
means of graphs describing the relation between parameters. Text, formulae and
pictures together tell the story of protecting the interface between soil and water.
Interpretation of these three requires the ability to imagine what is happening to the
water, the sediment and the structures. Keeping an open eye and mind when walking
along a bank or coast, or in any other place where water moves, surely helps.
This introductory chapter tries to reveal the core of the whole subject and therefore
also sometimes resembles a summary. The reader is advised to read it before and after
studying this book. Much of what is not clear when reading this chapter the first time,
might be recognized immediately when reading it again later. There is a saying:
"Understanding is nothing but getting used to" which contains some truth.
——
oe —.
Jnana loads, ~“ . a
/ strength and stability: Relation Practical
with boundary applications
Flow (2,3,4) conditions (10) hes
\ Porous flow (5,6) App B)
\& a) \
Ships (9) _ —_
Figure 1-21 Main structure of this book

The contents of the rest of the book can be divided into a more theoretical part
(Chapters 2-9, an application of theoretical hydrodynamics and soil mechanics) and
a part that deals with the applications of protections (Chapters 10-13). Chapter 2 to 9
contain the technical heart of the matter and have a logical composition. It starts with
flow phenomena and related erosion and stability problems (2, 3 and 4). Porous flow
is the next step with a small addition concerning geotechnical issues (5 and 6). Wind
wave phenomena are treated in Chapter 7 and related erosion and stability problems
in Chapter 8. Chapter 9 deals with all aspects of erosion and stability related to ships.
This chapter refers to many of the previous chapters, since the ship-related phenomena
contain both elements of flow and waves.


18 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

Chapter 10 is on dimensioning of protections and mainly deals with probabilistic
methods. Chapter 11 contains examples of protections as made in several places in the
world, the focus being on The Netherlands. Chapter 12 looks into environmental
aspects, with a focus on nature-friendly protections. The construction of protection
works is the subject of Chapter 13.

Consequently implementing the order of subjects appeared to be impossible. Filters
e.g. are treated in Chapter 6, including filters under wave loads, while waves are not
treated until Chapter 7. This has been done because a special section on filters in
Chapter 7 appeared to become too insignificant. The alternative of treating porous flow
and filters after waves was not attractive, as porous flow plays a role in the stability of
block revetments.

‘The main text in each chapter contains the basic message of this book with a one-page
summary at the end of the chapter. Intermezzo’s sometimes clarify the main text or
give some historic background. Examples are intended to illustrate the application of
formulas. Some chapters have Appendices. These are, by definition, no part of the main
text. They serve as background information on subjects that are supposed to have been
studied but that have possibly been forgotten somewhat. The same is valid for
Reminder I which contains simple equations that you should know by heart already,
but the reminder comes in handy when you do not. Reminder II contains some
interesting details about the contents of this book. They may sometimes be overlooked
easily in the avalanche of information, but can come in handy when one is confronted
with a protection problem. If these few formulas are known by heart, it will give the
reader the possibility to very quickly estimate the global dimensions of a protection.
There are three general appendices: A to C. Appendix A gives information on
materials, to be used in the many formulas in the book. Appendix B gives some
elaborated example cases. Appendix C gives the basic knowledge on scaling rules for
physical modelling, as this is the tool that was used to obtain most of the empirical
formulas that are presented in the book.

Finally, the References are for those who think that not everything is in this book,
which is indeed the case.


2 FLOW - Loads
a a
iA il ; I pA oe «
ghee eS ee er A a
ea ae aw Ser 3 = S
Sd & 2 -_ ee ts. = =
x ¥ 2 EE GS -
te KE Tagg 3e oN Z
a * s St A Se Fost
i at SMe Se: € a=
i ee Se ie
ee, Se OG — Ss - £8 Pas
Speers TS AF >
el ee ee POL = 7
—_<g — a  me we F
4 BA on at = £- >
So ao erie Sp ee. La
Se Iu wv gt =
Oosterschelde barrier (photo Rijkswaterstaat)


20 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
2.1 Introduction
When designing a protection it is necessary to have rather detailed information about
the velocity field. For many projects flow data is available from historical records or
from a numerical network model which calculates overall quantities, like discharges
Q and hence, given the geometry of the situation, average velocities: @ = Q/A.
® ® = j © velogity head
yaa M4 — =
an ae sre
aia x we i
"QA _—
Figure 2-1 Velocity field in various situations
For the design of a bank protection in a river bend (see Figure 2-1a), the velocity near
the bank must be known, which can be deducted from measurements in the river or in
ascale model, from a numerical model or from a sketch, based on some understanding
of the flow. In Figure 2-1b, it is inappropriate to work with a velocity averaged over
the cross-section downstream of the outflow, since the flow direction in some parts is
opposite to the main flow direction due to separation between the main flow and the
flow near the side-walls. Figure 2-1c shows a similar situation in a vertical cross-
section. Working with averaged velocity values (a = Q/A), e.g. with Chezy's law for
uniform flow: 7 = C JRi, would produce nearly the same value for the velocity
upstream and downstream of the sill, since the geometry is the same. The figure,
however, shows a completely different flow situation. Upstream, the velocity is well
represented with a logarithmic profile, as can be expected in a (stationary) uniform
flow. Downstream of the sill there is a flow separation with an eddy in which the flow
direction near the bottom is opposite to the mainstream. The eddy can be seen as an
ill-defined boundary for the flow, which also influences the turbulence level. In
practice, the flow is always turbulent, but at the transition between main flow and
eddies, the turbulence will be much greater and will persevere, far downstream from
the transition. Protections of the interface between water and soil in these areas need
to be relatively strong, because without protection, the erosion will be considerable.
Understanding the way water flows is paramount for every hydraulic engineer and a
sketch of the velocity field should mark the start of every project. For such a sketch it
is necessary to go from average values of the velocity to a local value and requires
some understanding of the turbulence. In general one can say that it is necessary to
have some insight in what is happening inside the water. Although turbulence is one
of the most complex subjects in hydraulics, some basic facets of turbulence will be
reviewed in the following section, focussing on phenomena rather than on formulas.


2, FLOW - LOADS 21
2.2 Turbulence
For the physical background of turbulence see Appendix 2.8.2. This section discusses
the characterization and importance of turbulence in hydraulic engineering. One of the
most striking features of turbulent motion is that the velocity and pressure show
irregular fluctuations, see Figure 2-2.
~ 15. mm 15:
i) @®
| «| ‘
u
u u
1.0 T 1.0
=|" )
stationary flow non-stationary flow
—- —
05 0.5
Figure 2-2 Velocity registration in turbulent flow
The abundance of definitions of turbulence indicates that the subject is complicated.
The definition according to Hinze, 1975 is: "Turbulent fluid motion is an irregular
motion, but statistically distinct average values can be discerned and can be described
by laws of probability". To do so, velocities are averaged over a certain period of time,
"smoothing" out the turbulent fluctuations, or by using repeated realizations of the
phenomenon. The values of velocity and pressure can be written as:
u=atul v=v+v) w=itw p=ptp' (2.1)
in which ~ indicates the average value and ’ a measure of the fluctuations from the
mean. The averaging period T (see Figure 2-2a), sometimes called the turbulence
period, is chosen such that it is long enough to smooth out turbulence and short
compared with the principal motion. Figure 2-2a is valid for a stationary flow, where
stationary means that the average is constant in time. A turbulent signal in a non-
stationary flow can be smoothed out, using a moving average, see Figure 2-2b.
The next step in obtaining statistically distinct average values is defining a measure of
the intensity of the velocity fluctuations. This can not be done directly with the
averages of the fluctuations, since these are 0 by definition, see Figure 2-2. Therefore
the squares of the fluctuations are used and are averaged. The intensity is now defined
as the square root of this average and again has the same dimension as a velocity: the
root-mean-square value (r.m.s., which is equal to the standard deviation in a Gaussian
distributed signal).
Turbulence can then be expressed in various ways, such as:
— — ra 2 fd
Wao vu vv vw
kad(u av aw"), y= yy = (2.2)
7 ai iT


22 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
k represents the total kinetic energy in a turbulent flow, r the relative fluctuation
intensities of u, v and 1, all of them compared with the main flow component, which
is customary. When r is used without any index, it means r,. One should always be
aware of the parameter that is used to make the rms-value dimensionless. It is possible
to relate the turbulent fluctuations (w’) to an average value (#) measured in a different
location, or averaged over an area like the depth-averaged velocity (i).
Be aware of the fact that becomes a rather useless parameter when the average
velocity (i) is small in respect to the fluctuations (w).
Reynolds stresses
Appendix 2.8.1, on basic equations, shows that, in a 2-dimensional situation, extra
normal and shear stresses appear in the momentum equation, due to the use of an
average velocity:
du _ du, _ On Op. Oa au? du'w
P| te + We > ot P| St
or 8x. Oz ax" a2? dx Oz
inertia press. vise. Reynolds stresses (2.3)
mean values turb, fluctuations
These extra terms originate from the non-linear convective inertia terms and have the
same dimension as stresses, but how logical is it to consider them as stresses? The
following is a qualitative analogy with elementary mechanics (adapted from
LeMéhauté, 1976).
A u zu
Ir } w
we oy u, TW “u@)
geo u’ u. 24 = x
i en O
af pare) ©) Sau} Veloaly curve in tow
S| ESS =
a ——$—_A en
Figure 2-3 Exchange of momentum due to turbulence
Consider the quarrelling fishermen in Figure 2-3. A and B throw stones with mass m
at each other with relative speed w’, When they hit the target, with the vectorially added
velocities w' and 1; or u2 respectively, the stone from A accelerates B, because wi > w2
and, reversely, the stone from B decelerates A. The exchange of momentum is equal
to m(u:-uw.), negative for A and positive for B.
Another analogy could be found in people walking in a very crowded street where
those on the sidewalk walk slower than those in the middle of the street. When being


2, FLOW - LOADS 23
pushed from the sidewalk, a pedestrian will be accelerated by the faster moving crowd
and vice versa.

A similar situation exists in flowing water with a velocity gradient, see the velocity
curve in Figure 2-3. Consider a mean flow with u = f(z), and du/dz > 0. The particles
that travel upwards arrive at a layer with a higher velocity. These particles (or lumps)
preserve their original velocity causing a negative component w’, thus decelerating the
flow in x-direction. Conversely, the particles arriving from above give rise to a positive
u'’, thus accelerating the flow. The flux of mass (per unit of area and per unit of time)
between the layers is equal to p w’ (compare the masses of the stones thrown from the
ships in Figure 2-3), hence the transferred momentum = pw’(i1-u) which looks
similar to p w'u' (with u’ as a measure of mz). The vertical flux of turbulent
momentum per unit surface area is then equivalent to a stress:
a kgmm_kgm_N
Te em (2.4)
mss sm m
Similarly, one can see the analogy between the Reynolds normal stress (p w'u’) and
stones thrown between B and C in the figure. Both stones result in a net force to the
right between B and C. Due to this stress, the force acting on a motionless body in a
current with a certain velocity can be 10% greater than the force acting on an identical
body dragged with the same velocity through water at rest.
Flow resistance
In laminar flow the resistance, expressed as a shear stress, is proportional with the flow
velocity. In turbulent flow, the quadratic terms in Equation (2.3) become dominant and
the relation between rand w becomes quadratic, see Figure 2-4a:

T=crpu (2.5)
Figure 2-4b shows the velocity distribution in a pipe or channel for laminar and
turbulent flow. The velocity is more homogeneous in a turbulent flow, as a result of
the turbulent exchange of momentum.

® ®

tT io
/ minar’

laminar-+-9 ‘turbulent

f turbulent
fansition u
u
Figure 2-4 Resistance in laminar and turbulent flow


24 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 2-1
The Reynolds stresses appear in Equation When the flow is laminar, the fluctuations in
(2.3) due to the use of average velocities, see Equation (2.3) are equal to 0 and there are no
Appendix 2.8.1, But how can extra forces be Reynolds stresses. When the flow becomes
created just because a mathematical proce- turbulent, the fluctuations in Figure 2-2a
dure is followed? And who informs the water create extra forces as was deducted using
of these extra forces? Of course, averaging Figure 2-3. Since we use #, both in laminar
cannot create forces and water flows nicely, and turbulent flow, we would omit these extra
even without our equations. forces without the Reynold stresses.
2.3 Wall flow
2.3.1 Uniform flow
The most elementary and one of the best known cases of wall flow is uniform flow in
achannel. All of the phases of the energy cascade in Section 2.8.2 are present in every
cross-section of the flow. The slope causes a continuous transformation of potential
energy, via kinetic energy in the main flow and in the turbulent eddies, into heat. An
equilibrium exists between the bottom shear stress and the component of the fluid
pressure on the slope, see Figure 2-5.
h | ava ze ———
dghl | / | >
k | | \VuFG | awra
= LL, Li! I \
b 0 05 10 15 Tt ! Ay
0 005 0.1 0.15 } “0,004
Figure 2-5 Uniform flow
The bottom shear stress is also related to the velocity, see Equation (2.5). The velocity
averaged over the height and in time is used (two overbars, in everyday use often
reduced to one, or even none). This leads to:
= _— =_1
t= pghl=cy pi (=pur=puyw,) => T= Jghl (2.6)
Vor
The use of h is only correct for an infinitely wide channel; otherwise the hydraulic
radius R should be used; cris a dimensionless friction coefficient. In this equation also
the so-called shear velocity w+ is introduced:
uw =Jt,/p (2.7)


2, FLOW- LOADS 25
The shear velocity is a parameter with the dimension of velocity, but in fact it expresses
the shear stress; it is not a velocity which can be measured directly in a physical
environment.
In traditional hydraulics, empirical relations are used, such as:
Chezy: 7=CJRT with: c= |&
fe
f (2.8)
= loops . e
Manning: # =—R?3./7 within = RMo |
n Ve
The Chezy coefficient C and the Manning number n are not dimensionless; both
definitions contain the acceleration of gravity, g. So gravity, which is responsible for
the flow, is only implicitly present in these empirical equations! C is expressed in
[m!/s] and n in [s/m!]. n is a roughness coefficient, while C is actually a
"smoothness" coefficient (a large value of C means little roughness). From Equations
(2.6) and (2.8) together with the definition of w+ follows:
us =e /C (2.9)
C, which is used in this book, can be related to the so-called equivalent sand roughness
according to Nikuradse-Colebrook, for a hydraulically rough situation as follows:
12R 12R
c= ME ty PR aig log —_(&, is equivalent roughness) (2.10)
K k, k,
For a smooth bed with grains, the Nikuradse roughness k; usually equals several times
the characteristic grain diameter (see Chapter 3). For a moving bed, higher values are
possible due to the formation of ripples or dunes.
Figure 2-5 also gives some measurements in a uniform flow. One bar over w means
averaged over time and the double bar means averaged over time and over the
waterdepth. For practical reasons, this notation will not be used consequently in the
following sections and chapters, so understanding of the formulas is required to deduce
which definition is used. The vertical velocity profile is logarithmic with an average
velocity at about 0.4 times the waterdepth from the bottom. The turbulent fluctuations
for a uniform flow can be approximated with:
1 ph [oe uhwh,
Fes fy wa 124 fon = 2.11)
wh +o Cc i? Ce


26 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
The expression for the depth-averaged fluctuation was derived from numerical
computations by Hoffmans, 1993, while the turbulent shear stress follows directly
from equation (2.6) and (2.8). Now that we have simple equations that express the
turbulent quantities, we can calculate the Reynolds-stresses. In uniform wall flow these
are a function of the roughness only. This is not really surprising, as the wall roughness
is the only source of turbulence in wall flow, which is also clearly visible in the
measurements in Figure 2-5. C-values are normally in the range 40 to 60 Vim/s, giving
depth-averaged values of r of 0.06 to 0.1
Example 2-1
20 mi/s of water flows in a 10 m wide channel with vertical banks, a bed slope of 1/1000
and a roughness of 0.2 m. What is the depth, the velocity, the Chezy-value, the relative
turbulence intensity and the relative turbulent shear stress?
We assume uniform flow. Calculating the depth and velocity, using the Chezy equation, is
an iterative process. First, a depth of 1 mis estimated (any estimate will work). The hydraulic
radius then becomes: R = bhi(b+2h) = 10/22 = 0.83 m. The Chezy-value becomes
18log(12RIk,) = 18 log(12x0.83/0.2) = 30.6 vm/s. Using u = CVRI, u = 30.6\0.83x0.001 =
0.883 m/s follows. The discharge would then be: Q = bhu = 8.83 m’/s which is over twice
smaller than the given discharge of 20 mvs. A new estimate of h = 2 m, with the same
procedure gives C = 34.8 \mis, u = 1.32 mis and Q = 26.3 mis, so, h = 2 mis too much
and a lower value has to be chosen. The final result for Q = 20 m‘/s is: h = 1.67 m, C= 33.8
\m/s and u = 1.2 mis.
Note: with sloping banks the iteration involves more parameters.
The relative turbulence intensity is approached with Equation (2.9): r= 1.2 \giC = 0.11 and
the relative turbulent shear stress is: g/C? = 8.6 10°.
2.3.2. Non-uniform flow
In practice, flow is never uniform. Accelerations and decelerations influence the
boundary layer and the turbulence in the flow. The boundary layer is defined as the
region which is influenced by the presence of the wall, in contrast to the region outside
the boundary layer. In stationary, uniform flow, the boundary layer is fully developed
and takes up the entire water depth, leading to the logarithmic velocity distribution,
see Figure 2-5. The following illustrations show wall flow with boundary layers that
are not fully developed. When water suddenly flows along a wall, a boundary layer
will start to grow, see e.g. Schlichting, 1968. This is illustrated in Figure 2-6, showing
the growth of a boundary layer when an infinitely thin plate is placed in a flow with u
=u.


2. FLOW- LOADS 27
U,
i Pee |
' ' ' t yc?
f aa ewer 4 | (uniform flow)
' —= —_—_— x
f +—\thin plate }
Figure 2-6 Growth of boundary layer
The shear stress along the plate slows down the flow and the exchange of momentum
will lead to the growth of the boundary layer. This growth can be estimated roughly
with Xx) ~ 0.02 x to 0.03 x, indicating that after a distance equal to 30 - 50 times the
waterdepth, the flow will be fully developed and the boundary layer will take up the
entire waterdepth. With the growth of 6, the shear stress decreases and eventually, c/
reaches the value expressed in Equation (2.6).
In the situation in Figure 2-6 there are no accelerations or decelerations on a macro
level; the thin plate only creates a new boundary layer. With accelerations and
decelerations, another situation arises. Acceleration is due to a pressure gradient in the
flow direction and an opposite gradient leads to deceleration, both cause a change in
the boundary layer thickness. The change in dis roughly given by (see Booij, 1992):
5 _~(4t05)5 dug (2.12)
de uy de
indicating that acceleration causes reduction of the boundary layer thickness, while
deceleration does the opposite. These changes of the boundary layer are visible in the
velocity distribution, see Figure 2-7. In accelerating flow, the velocity profile becomes
fuller, increasing du/dz and hence increasing the shear stress.
Zz z i z | ae:
du; /dx>0 du, /dx <0;
1 /
| du, / dx = 0 | Pe | p
7 ee
— iu —_— U = —_—
Figure 2-7 Influence of pressure gradient on velocity profile
The effect of acceleration on turbulence can be seen in Figure 2-8. In a wind tunnel,
turbulence is created by means of a grid. The fluctuations decrease downstream from
the grid. In the contraction, the fluctuations in the flow direction (w') decrease even
further, because the flow concentrates. The fluctuations perpendicular to the flow
increase in the contraction. The total amount of turbulent kinetic energy, k, remains
approximately constant, Due to the increased velocity in the contraction, the relative
turbulence, r, using the /ocal mean velocity, see Equation (2.2), decreases.


28 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
4. ™ contacon|
f ws
f Pe Py
Hf WA wi aa Se
x
Figure 2-8 Turbulence in wind tunnel contraction (from: Reynolds, 1977)
In decelerating flow the opposite happens: growth of the boundary layer with possibly
flow separation, see Figure 2-7 and considerable increase in turbulence. The following
section show several examples.
2.4 Free flow
2.4.1 Mixing layers
Whenever two bodies of fluid move along each other with different velocities, a
mixing layer will grow between them, comparable with the growth of the boundary
layer in wall flow. Figure 2-9 shows some characteristics of mixing layers (from
Rajaratnam, 1976). In this figure one layer flows and the other is stagnant for reasons
of simplicity. This is not essential; any velocity difference causes a mixing layer. The
stagnant fluid will accelerate, whereas the flowing mass will lose momentum. In the
mixing layer the shear stress is intense, inducing turbulence.
Uy 03
lw
Flowing aoe 02 \
a oe -b Ke
"TV [pb | ce SS
Log iam ene tae) peer 6 J 0 hie
5 yg
2" | stagnant )>~~_ on} 74a
Psa 02
03
0 Os 1.0 0 O14 02
——> uu, —> Fas bn fo
Figure 2-9 Flow, velocities and turbulence in mixing layer
The diverging angles of the mixing layer (see Figure 2-9) are a ~ 5° and a ~ 10°,
meaning that the flow penetrates into the stagnant area with a slope of 1:6. The line
u = up/2 is taken as the x-axis, which deviates slightly in the direction of the stagnant
zone. The width of the mixing layer, b, is defined as the distance between the points
where the velocity is 0.99 wo and 0.5 wo. The momentum equation shows that ocx and
from that we can assume similarity in the flow profiles, hence w/1o is a function of 2/b
only. The assumption of similarity has been confirmed in experiments, see Figure 2-9


2, FLOW - LOADS 29
which is based on measurements, see Rajaratnam, 1976. w/wo has been plotted against
z/x, which is, with b ox, equivalent to z/b.

The velocity distribution in the mixing layer can be described reasonably with:
;: 0.693 |= ' 1) ; -

u=up for z<—b and u=1e 6 J forz>—b with b=0.12x

(2.13)
Since we are interested in turbulent velocity fluctuations, which influence stability and
erosion, some measurements of r are also presented in Figure 2-9. Note that the
fluctuations in all directions have been made dimensionless by using the driving
velocity of the shear layer: uo. The maximum of occurs where the velocity gradient
is maximum and where u = 0.5 uo. Compared with the local velocity, the velocity
fluctuations are twice as high. The total turbulent kinetic energy in the centre of the
mixing layer, related to uo, is approximately: k/w? = (nm? + mn? + re2/2 =
¥y x (0.22 + 0.15? + 0.152) = 0.045, see Equation (2.2).
2.4.2 Jets
A jet flows into a large body of water with a surplus velocity compared with the
ambient fluid. Many flow situations in hydraulic engineering show resemblance to jets,
e.g. flow from a culvert or the flow behind a ship's propeller. The falling water mass
in a plunging breaker (see Chapter 7) also has jet-like features. A plane jet is a two-
dimensional outflow from an orifice and a circular jet is 3-dimensional with axial
symmetry. The jet attracts water from the ambient fluid, causing an increase of the
discharge in the flow direction with a constant momentum flux. The extremes are at
one end an infinitely small orifice with an infinitely high velocity and at the other end
an infinitely large flow area with an infinitely small velocity, but with the same
momentum flux. Figure 2-10 shows some characteristics of jets.
Close to the orifice (the flow development region) turbulence penetrates into the core
of the jet. This is the mixing layer as described in the previous section. The velocity in
the centre-line is equal to uo. After the flow has developed fully, the velocity decreases,
the jet spreads and the dimensionless velocity profile no longer changes with x, see
Figure 2-10.
Only results relevant to hydraulic engineering are presented. For a detailed description
of jet phenomena, the reader is referred to Rajaratnam, 1976. The velocity distribution
can be described as a Gaussian curve with only two parameters, tm (u in the centre of
the jet) and b (a typical width, usually defined where u = u,,/2). Plots of u/um against
z/b (for plane jets; for circular jets against R/b, R being the radial distance from the
centre) are similar for all x (in the developed region!, see Figure 2-10). For plane jets:
Um 21 / we and b ocx can be derived and for circular jets: um 2% 1/x and b ox. Numerical
values for these proportionalities must be determined by experiments. For free jets the
following proportionalities were found, see also Figure 2-10:


30 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
mixing layers__4---~"
D, 28 2\R nea it zRle 02
sbeat NN x 2 €
aie! t iN #04
fully developed flow D
1 ¢ Onn Os == 0.0
7p, plane ——
Unde as, a 0.1
I 02
Cit) 10 700 so 0 05 10
>» xD, /2B — wu,
Figure 2-10 Flow and velocities in jets
[° 693 (2 )
. 35 3)
Plane jets: 1, se b=O.1x u=Uy e wr)
ve (2.14)
(ry)
~0.693 | =]
“oe; 63 (0 (5) |
Circular jets: uy, —h=0.1x  U=um e }
x/D
‘These expressions are only valid in the region of fully developed flow, which starts at
about x = 12B for plane jets (B is half the width of the orifice) and x = 6D for circular
jets (D is the diameter of the orifice). In the flow development region the velocity can
be approximated with uo.
Since we are again interested in turbulent fluctuations, Figure 2-11 shows some
measurements for a circular jet: Figure 2-1 la in the centre-line and Figure 2-1 1b from
the centre to the edges of the jet. Note that the fluctuations in all directions are relative
to the velocity in x-direction, namely with x, which is the maximum velocity in the
centre-line, which decreases with x. The relative fluctuations in the centre-line (defined
here as €.g. r= unns/t#m) become constant with increasing x, reaching a value of about
30% in the centre-line for r,. For R or z = b x 0.1x the velocity is, by definition, tn/2.
The fluctuation there (R/x = 0.1x/4¢ = 0.1) is about 25% relative to um, 80, relative to
the local velocity, it is about 50%.
The above equations are for normal jets. A special case of a jet is the flow from a
propeller of a ship. Because of the propeller, the turbulence in such a flow is much
more, and differently distributed | than ina normal jet. This will be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 9.


2. FLOW - LOADS 31
@ _ rincentre-line jet (©) rincross section jet
08 a CO at x/D = 100
. I
"o2 Teale 07 fu
| 04 all r related tou, | 0.4) Fuoly
0.0 . ; . 0.0...
0 25 50 75 -»wp 0 0.05 01 0.15 02-+Rx
Figure 2-11 Turbulent fluctuations in circular jet
Example 2-2
A circular jet flows with 6 m/s from a nozzle with a diameter of 1.5 m. What is the velocity at
a location 15 m downstream from the nozzle and 1 m from the axis of the jet?
From equation 2.13 the velocity in the jet axis 15 m downstream follows: Um = 6.3uo/(x/D) =
6.3x6/10 = 3.78 m/s.
The velocity 1m from the axis is: u = Um exp(-0.693(R/0.1x)?) = 2.78 mis.
2.5 Combination of wall flow and free flow
2.5.1 Flow separation
Most flow situations are combinations or alternations of wall flow and free flow.
Examples are flow along sills, abutments, groynes or bridge piers but also constrictions
and expansions in a river or canal. For the archetypes of geometrical variations
(vertical and horizontal constrictions and expansions, detached bodies), acceleration,
deceleration and turbulence are discussed and illustrated with experimental results.
Again, the focus is on phenomena rather than on formulas.
In these situations both boundary layers (wall turbulence) and mixing layers (free
turbulence) are present. Flow separation can be seen as the transition from wall flow
to free flow. In the case of a sharp edge (see Figure 2-12a) it is easy to see that the flow
has to separate, since no separation would mean that a streamline would make a right
angle with a radius R = 0, leading to an infinite centripetal force (Fe = w/R).
Up
Wake? ae u u pene Ee
oe — ;
—\\e2 rf B nin of porate
@fSe ® E
Figure 2-12 Flow separation around blunt and round body


32 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

So, the water cannot follow such a sharp curve and goes straight on. Here, the relation
between (convective) inertia and viscosity plays a role. With (very) low Re-numbers,
the flow can make the turn. Viscosity can then be seen as the "tension strength" of a
fluid. When there is no fixed separation point, the situation is like in Figure 2-12b.
From B onwards, the velocity decreases causing growth of the boundary layer up till
point D (see also Figure 2-7 and Equation (2.12)) and eventually flow separation. This
point of separation depends on the shape, Re-number and roughness of the body
surface and can not be predicted accurately for an arbitrary body. Flow retardation and
separation usually increases turbulence and hence the load caused by the flow.

2.5.2 Vertical expansion (backward-facing step)

A sudden increase in depth in the flow direction is often indicated as a backward facing
step. The uniform wall flow before the step becomes free with a mixing layer
immediately downstream of the step and eventually becomes uniform wall flow again
with an increased depth. Figure 2-13 shows some measurements near a backward-
facing step, mainly from Nakagawa and Nezu, 1987. Figure 2-13a shows the flow
situation with some characteristic areas. Between the mixing layer and the bottom, a
recirculation zone exists, which is absent in a completely free mixing layer. The
location where the main flow "touches down" is the reattachment point. From there a
new wall boundary layer grows and the flow tends to reach a new equilibrium
situation. Figure 2-13b, c and d show the vertical distributions of 7, r. (also related to
a) and u'w'/ 72, respectively. 7, is the maximum (time averaged) velocity on top of
the step. The mixing layer and the tendency to revert to uniform wall flow are clearly
visible. The velocity distribution and the values of r, correspond quite well with
Equation (2.13) and Figure 2-9. The reattachment point lies 5-7 times the step height
downstream of the step. The area near and slightly downstream of the reattachment
point, appears to be the critical area of attack on a bed protection, see also Chapter 3.
It is clear that 10 times the step height downstream of the step, the flow is still far from
uniform.

Figure 2-13e shows the deviations from hydrostatic pressure (pg(h-z)) made
dimensionless with the pressure accompanying the velocity on top of the step
(4p/2,pu:2). Near the reattachment point, where the flow hits the bottom, the pressure
is high. In the recirculation zone the pressure is low due to the entrainment of water
into the mainstream. This pressure pattern causes flow from the reattachment point in
a direction opposite to that of the mainstream.

For calculations of stone stability and scour it is important to have an idea of the degree
of recovery of the flow as a function of the distance downstream of the step. Figure
2-13f is derived from Hoffmans, 1993, and shows the transition of the turbulence in
the mixing layer to that of the new wall boundary layer. The value of k/u:2 downstream
of the step is 0.045 as found from Figure 2-9, Section 2.4, while the final turbulence


2. FLOW - LOADS 33
in the boundary layer is calculated according to an expression similar to Equation
(2.11).

4:
SS
Q° ® decelerationzone ---~ ~ &
2 big lyer RONDO 2 }
—-==== 2 Mixing layer dary layer | 14
|" Dlrecirculation one | cf (
oO oT 4 7 10 Oo of 4 — 10
— yD xD
reattachment point
Q 3 0.2 @ 3 0.0:
2 @ 2 Tek
a uwlu,
[1 I1
0 0
01 4 T— yp 10 01 4 7— yp 10
a3 =— 9% 0.06
co © p/%pu, = 54>
STUER, 0.02 4 gg q}_]O “kmixing layer |“
| 00 | 208 Roundy ett nant =
o oF 4 7. yp 10 01 4 7— x/D 10
Figure 2-13 Flow phenomena in backward-facing step
For locations downstream of the reattachment point, Hoffmans proposes to calculate
the relative depth averaged turbulence, ras follows:
-2 1.08
D
r(x)=,]0.5 ky 1-—=| |~41] 4145-3 (2.15)
h} la c
in which / is a relaxation length (A ~ 6.67 /). ko is the relative turbulent energy in the
mixing layer (~ 0.045). The factor 0.5 accounts for the substitution of ko by the depth-
averaged r. The velocity on top of the step is substituted by the velocity downstream
with a factor (I-D/h), derived from the continuity equation. x is the distance
downstream of the reattachment point (= 6D downstream of the step). The second term
represents the equilibrium value of r in uniform wall flow.
2.5.3 Vertical constriction and expansion (sill)
A sill is a good example of a vertical constriction (Blom, 1993). Computations were
done and experiments were carried out in a flume. Figure 2-14 shows measurements
obtained with the experiments. The slopes of the sill were such that no real flow
separation occurred.


34 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
fs LZ a
30h 38h_«= «38h 43h 5th
Figure 2-14 Flow characteristics around sill (from Blom, 1993)
In Figure 2-14a we see the changes of the velocity: a logarithmic profile before the
sill, accelerating flow and a more rectangular profile on top, decelerating flow and
almost separating flow beyond the sill and a slow recovery to a logarithmic profile in
uniform flow again, see also Figure 2-7. The vertical velocities are negligible, except
near the sill (Figure 2-14b).
The turbulent fluctuations 1;,, related to uo (the average velocity upstream, Q/A, Figure
2-14c), are rather small before the sill and remain more or less the same on the sill,
leading to a lower local r-value (the average velocity doubles). Beyond the sill the
turbulence increases considerably, due to the deceleration and the energy transfer to
turbulence (this internal process is the so-called Carnot energy-loss in basic
hydraulics). The r-value beyond the sill is about 0.3. This is slightly lower than in a
mixing layer, where it would be about 0.35 - 0.4 (~ 0.2 related to the velocity on top
of the sill, twice as much related to the average downstream velocity). So, even without
flow separation, this flow pattern closely resembles the pattern of a backward facing
step and deceleration always causes a considerable increase in turbulence.
In the acceleration zone, the shear stress tends to increase, which is visible in Figure
2-14d. In the deceleration zone, the shear stress is great with the maximum velocity
gradient and much smaller at the bottom. It is good to bear in mind that the (mean)
shear stress behind a constriction does not determine the load; the turbulent
fluctuations can be more important. Beyond the sill, the flow slowly recovers to
uniform flow.
2.5.4 Horizontal expansion
The situation is similar to the backward facing step of Section 2.5.2, but now the flow
is constricted in a horizontal direction, see e.g. the research by Tukker, 1997 and
Zuurveld, 1998. Figure 2-15 shows some results.
A mixing layer originates beyond the sudden expansion, but the growth is now limited
compared with the situation in Section 2.4.1 due to bed friction (Figure 2-15a). Both
near the bottom and the surface, the velocity spreads into the stagnant zone, again with
recirculation beyond the expansion (Figure 2-15b). The turbulent fluctuations show
large differences between the bottom and the surface (Figure 2-15c): the effect of the
mixing layer is only visible at the surface, at the bottom the friction dominates. Figure
2-15d shows the peak velocities near the bottom. These peak velocities (max = 7 +
30; = (1+3r) 7) are often held responsible for stability and erosion. It appears that the


2. FLOW- LOADS 35
highest peak velocities near the bottom occur in the main stream and not in the mixing
layer.

a — surface
(0) © Gimmis) Bottom
—> flow a H i t 4
s2zctz77] "mixing layer J i pe) 1 mis iy
stagnant eee ee ! bad
x 0 14 2 3 4 5m
r(-) — surface (1+3r)U near bottom (m/s)
@ ~--_bottom ®
! ! os ! 1.1-1.15 <0.7 0"
Figure 2-15 Flow characteristics in horizontal expansion (Zuurveld, 1998)
2.5.5 Horizontal constriction and expansion (groyne)
Abutments and groynes are clear examples of horizontal constrictions. Natural
variations in the width and protruding points in a river show the same phenomena. For
a study on scour and grain stability, 1/6 of the width of a flume was blocked and the
flow pattern for this situation was investigated, see Ariéns,1993.
Figure 2-16 shows measured values of the velocity (vertically averaged and averaged
over the turbulence period, see Equation (2.1)), i, the relative turbulence (related to
the Jocal value of iz), r and the (absolute) value of the peak velocity, (1+37) 7. The
acceleration and deceleration are clearly visible in the figure showing the average
velocity. Acceleration again causes a decrease in the relative turbulence from 8% to
less than 5%, with again an increase in the deceleration zone. In the mixing layer, the
relative turbulence reaches high values. (The mixing layer is now curved, because the
flow is forced from the side of the flume to the centre.)
a OR ey
Cie u (m/s)
flow a 0.4-0.6
) os
+310
r(-) (mis)
(0.08 ] 0.05-0.1
0.04-0.05 0.65-0.
upstream averages
Figure 2-16 Flow characteristics for a horizontal constriction (from Ariéns, 1993)


36 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

The diagram representing peak velocities contains a large zone with high values. Now,
in contrast with the expansion in Section 2.5.4, the area with the highest peak velocities
coincides largely with the mixing layer. This is, however, due to the velocity pattern
associated with the acceleration around the groyne.

2.5.6 Detached bodies

Examples of detached bodies are bridge piers or jetty piers, nautical structures and
offshore platforms. An elementary shape of a detached body, which has been studied
intensively, is a cylinder. As this shape is important to the engineering practice, it is
useful to pay attention to the complicated flow characteristics around a cylinder. To a
large extent, the flow pattern and the forces in the flow are determined by flow
separation around the cylinder but as the separation depends on the roughness of the
surface and the Re-number (now defined as uD/v where D is the diameter of the
cylinder), it is still very hard to predict. Moreover, the flow around a cylinder is truly
3-dimensional.

Potential flow (see e.g. Le Méhauté, 1976) is a classical approach to flow around a
cylinder. It neglects some of the above-mentioned complications but is still useful as
a starter. Figure 2-17a and c show streamlines and velocities (relative to the upstream
average) according to potential flow. Figure 2-17 b and d show measurements near the
bottom. A comparison of a with b shows the merits and the limitations of the potential
approach. In the upstream area and in the acceleration area, roughly up to the centre-
line of the cylinder, the similarity is quite good. In the deceleration area, the flow
separates and the whole pattern changes. In the wake of the cylinder, a recirculation
occurs like we have seen before in the case of an expansion. The potential theory
predicts a doubling of the velocity alongside the cylinder. The measurements near the
bottom show the same, albeit with lower absolute values near the bottom.

Figure 2-17e shows the water surface according to potential flow and as measured.
Along the central streamline, the water in the vicinity of the cylinder decelerates in
front of the body, accelerates at the sides and decelerates again at the back. The
associated water level, rises, falls and rises again (see points 1-2-3) with the local
velocity head (w?/2g). The conversion of potential energy into kinetic energy on its
way from | to 2 can be considered a "ride downhill", from 2 to 3 it is "uphill" into an
area with increasing pressure. In a perfect fluid there is no friction and the pressures in
1 and 3 are equal (pressure recovery), hence the net force on the body is zero.

The viscosity of a real fluid, however, changes the picture completely. The friction in
the boundary layer stops the uphill motion between 2 and 3 causing flow separation
from the body. The flow separation and wake result in an extra drag force on the body
(in addition to the friction along the body).


LOW LOADS
=f VS ———_ Aas
Aa —"B
@ streamlines © streamlines measured
potential flow near bottom
0.75-1.25 04-08
0-07 0-04
velocities potential
© _ fow(elatve to ® welocties messed
upstream value)
“Wyte iow (a= 01 0.1-0.125
Aral fluid a 4
) water surface in .
© sree Ren CD) turuenceelative to
oe: OG
s 08 velocity
vertical
upstream
04-06 i
@© velocity contours @)__ tow directions
cross section A-B cross section A-B
Figure 2-17 Flow details around cylinder (from Melville and Raudkivi, 1977)
Figure 2-17 illustrates some more interesting details of the flow around a cylinder
(from Melville and Raudkivi, 1977). Figure 2-17f shows the turbulence intensity (r =
ums/to) near the bottom. In the acceleration area on the sides of the cylinder the
turbulence intensity diminishes, as can be seen in the diagram. In the mixing layer
between the wake behind the cylinder and the main flow, the maximum intensity,
around 0.2, is found.
Figure 2-17g and h show the vertical cross-section at the centre-line of the cylinder.
Figure 2-17g gives the contour lines of the velocity in the direction of the main flow.
The deceleration is clearly visible. The rise in pressure that comes with this decrease
of velocity causes another interesting phenomenon. The pressure rises with Ap = 1/2p
w. The velocity near the water surface is higher than near the bottom, hence Ap, with
a constant piezometric level across the waterdepth, results in a pressure gradient
downwards. This causes a vertical flow (Figure 2-17h) which plays an important role
in the scour around a cylinder, see Chapter 4. Theoretically, the vertical velocity in the
downward flow can reach the same value as the approach velocity but measurements
show less than half that value. At the foot of the pier, a circulation is visible. In Chapter


38 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
4 we will see that this is the beginning of the so-called horse-shoe vortex. Some authors
claim that this vortex is always present around a pier, others say that it originates in
the scour hole in front of the pier and that without scour there is no vortex. More
information on flow around cylindrical piers is found in e.g. Melville and Raudkivi,
1977, Raudkivi and Etttema, 1985, Zdravkovich, 1997 and Ahmed and Rajaratnam,
1998.
2.6 Load reduction
Sometimes it can be desirable to reduce the flow as a means of protection or to avoid
the need for heavy protections. Figure 2-18 shows three ways to reduce the flow, two
at a river bank and one at an outflow.
aS (0 —_—
=. come —
(POS | ee enmacar —
2-5L
Figure 2-18 Possible reduction of flow induced loads
Groynes keep the main flow at a distance from the banks. In rivers, they are usually
part of a complete river training scheme, not just to reduce the velocity, but also to
maintain a stable channel with sufficient depth for navigation. In this case the focus is
on flow reduction. At the tip of a groyne, the flow separates and an eddy is formed
(see Figure 2-18a). To keep the main flow away from the bank, the distance between
two groynes should be less than 5 times their length. A more strict demand is the eddy
pattern. For a proper guidance of the main flow, there should be one eddy between two
groynes which requires a distance between groynes of about twice the groyne length.
The velocity in the eddy is about 1/3 of the velocity in the main current, so the
reduction is about 2/3. For more information see Jansen, 1979. Groynes, however, are
very costly and cause their own problems, e.g. scouring holes at the tip. The cost-
benefit relation should be considered in all cases.
Instead of using groynes, flow near the bank can be reduced in a diffuse way by
increasing the roughness. This can be done by making the bed more rough or by
placing resistance elements in the flow. The latter is the case when vegetation, e.g.
reed or trees, is planted along the bank. It is possible to express the resistance of a
roughened bed with a Chezy-coefficient. A first approximation of the velocity
reduction is found by assuming that the water level slope is equal for the main flow
and the bank, see Figure 2-18b:


2, FLOW - LOADS 39
vec iT 9 Ba fe (2.16)
m CYn

In Chapter 12 examples of roughness values for various types of vegetation will be
given.

When the turbulence caused by a mixing layer has to be avoided or postponed till a
point where the velocity is lower has been reached, walls are often streamlined with
slopes of I : 8 or even less to prevent flow separation, see Figure 2-18c. This is often
done with outflows at culverts and similar structures. The fact that the flow does not
separate within the streamlined walls does not mean that there is no increase in the
turbulence intensity. Deceleration always causes more turbulence, so, the main
advantage is the reduction of the mean flow velocity.

2.7 Summary

To design a protection, or to judge whether a protection is necessary, detailed
information on the velocity field is needed to determine the loads. This can be obtained
from measurements, a flow model or a sketch, based on overall discharge data and
insight into the flow phenomena. In fact, every preliminary design should start with a
simple sketch.

The same is true for turbulence in the velocity field, albeit that the determination of
turbulence is much more difficult and uncertain. The turbulent velocity fluctuations
are a result of velocity differences, either between a flow and a wall (wall turbulence)
or between two fluid bodies (free turbulence). Turbulence is always coupled with loss
of kinetic energy, so, especially in deceleration areas much turbulence can be
expected. In accelerating flow the relative turbulence is less, but the mean bed shear
stress increases. The turbulent fluctuations cause so-called Reynolds stresses: a
normal stress due to the velocity fluctuations in one direction and a shear stress due
to the correlation between the fluctuations in two directions.

For uniform (wall) flow, relatively simple, partly empirical relations are available for
the average velocity (like ij =CJRI) and accompanying expressions for wall
roughness and turbulence which originates at the wall. The boundary layer in uniform
flow covers the whole waterdepth. Mixing layers play an essential part in free
turbulence and occur in many situations in hydraulic engineering. Another example of
free turbulence can be found in jet flow, which is also frequently encountered in flow
situations near hydraulic structures. A typical value for wall turbulence is r (= Urms/
7) = 0.1 and for free turbulence rnax * 0.2-0.3. These values also depend on where
is defined.


40 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Flow situations around bodies, like (bridge) piers, through vertical constrictions, like
sills and through horizontal constrictions, like abutments and groynes, all show
acceleration followed by deceleration with the accompanying turbulence. The
acceleration leads to higher velocities than in uniform flow situations, causing a
greater load on any interface in the neighbourhood. The same is true in the
deceleration zone where the increase of the Reynolds stresses is caused by an increase
of the turbulent fluctuations. Section 2.5 gives several examples of combinations of
turbulent wall flow and free flow. You are advised to study these thoroughly and, above
all, to imagine what is happening. This will be all the more fruitful when coupled with
observations of flow phenomena everywhere around you in rivers, ditches or in your
sink,
Finally, some examples of load reduction are presented in Section 2.6.
2.8.1 Basic equations
The basic equations for fluid motion (conservation of momentum and mass) will be
used for demonstration purposes only and mathematical purity is sacrificed in search
of simplicity. For more detail, see e.g. Schlichting (1968) or Le Méhauté (1976).
z| u+(du/dz)dz z w + (dw/dz)dz
caves OE
Fe
ut ix)dx
| 4 nt
v v
dp/ax)dx
p ud ( L ox
x x
® el ‘ay © / Web ‘ay
Figure 2-19 Forces and flow with regard to dxdydz
The momentum equation is in fact Newton's second law: F = ma. For a 2-dimensional
flow the resulting force in the x-direction is (see Figure 2-19a):
Fy=- 2 de (dye) + (de dy) + Fe(x) (2.17)
Ox Oz
The second term on the right-hand side of Equation (2.17) represents the rate of change
of viscous shear stress perpendicular to the flow (in the z-direction there is a shear
stress of equal magnitude). The viscous shear is an internal stress caused by the transfer
of molecular momentum. For a Newtonian fluid: 7 = pz Ou/@z, so, Ov/0z = u( @u/Oz*),


2, FLOW - LOADS 4
in which sis the dynamic viscosity. The external force, Fe, can result from gravity,
which is supposed to work in z-direction, so, in the x-direction, external forces are
neglected. The acceleration in x-direction can be written as:

Du _@u Oudx Oudz _ du ou eu dx dz
ay =— = — + — — + — — = —+u—+w— (— =u, —=w)
Dt Ot @xdt Ozdt Ot Ox Oz dt dt
(2.18)
With m = p (dxdydz) this leads to:
ma, =p (dr dy de), ey Oe 4 wll |=
ot Ox Oz
> (2.19)
Fy =~ de (dy dz) +p — ae (de dy)
Ox az
Dividing by (dx dy dz) finally gives the (simplified) Navier-Stokes equation for the
x-direction, which is valid for both laminar and turbulent flow:
du du. du) Op. &u
p| —+u—+w— |=- + >
Ot ax Oz Ox ez
local convective pressure viscous (2.20)
inertia inertia gradient shear
The continuity equation (conservation of mass) for a non-compressible fluid with
constant density states that the net flow through a fluid element without a free surface
must be zero (see Figure 2-19b):
Ou OW _y (2.21)
Ox @z
For turbulent flow, the values of velocity and pressure in the equations can be split up.
For the velocity this gives: u = # + u', in which @ indicates the average value and u'
the turbulent fluctuation. In order to work with average values, Equation (2.20) can be
averaged over the turbulence period (see Figure 2-2). The linear terms, like @u/dt
become:
a T T
HN ON ie w)ar=
ot Ty Ot ary
(2.22)
alt alt on Ot
— J it dt+—— J u' dt=—+0=——
aT y aT 4 or ot


42 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
since:
1; 1;
w== [ude and w=— f w'dr=0 (2.23)
T T
0 0
The same holds for w and p, the linear terms for laminar and turbulent flow are
expressed in the same type of function. This is not true, however, for the quadratic
terms:
si T 1 T —
wea if we dt=— Il i? +2-a-u'+u?) dt=i +u?
T T
0 0
1; If
since: = [ 2-m-u' dt=2m = [ a! dt=2-7-0=0 (2.24)
T 0 T i)
T —
leon 2 2
and: = fw? de= 1"? (mean value of u'? # 01)
T 0
Similarly:
uw=(@+u')-(w+w )=70+u'w+ wi tu'w hence: ww=uw+uw
(2.25)
and Equation (2.20) becomes (note: the viscous term is of the second order but linear):
ou - du .- au eu p. eu
p| Stu tw ta Ss SS f=-F 4 pS
at ox Oz ox az Ox a2?
local conv.inertia conv.inertia press. vise. (2.26)
inertia by mean vel. by fluct.vel. grad. shear
With the continuity equation, this can be rewritten to obtain the so-called Reynolds
equation:
— _ _ _ 2— vr aa
au ,_ ou, _om)_ op, Oi | au? , au
p| — +i — +0 |=-— + w— - p] —+——_
ao a) ae" ay? ax az
inertia press. vise. Reynolds-stresses (2.27)
|
mean values turb. fluct.


2. FLOW- LOADS 43
The Reynolds-stresses are a consequence of working with time-averaged values. The
turbulent shear stress (u'w’) is usually much larger than the viscous shear stress, while
the turbulent normal stress (w”) can become important in situations with flow
separation, see the examples in Section 2.5.
2.8.2 Why turbulence?
Everybody who has been on an aeroplane in rough weather, or on a bike in gusty wind,
has some idea of turbulence. And everybody who looks carefully at the fluid motion
in a river, or even in a straight flume in a laboratory, will notice the turbulent character
of the flow. Turbulent means the opposite of laminar. Laminar flow is smooth and
orderly, while turbulent flow is chaotic and fluctuates, even when the flow as a whole
looks quiet.
a aes a
o—-——, © ——___-
OO 2
=i. — \
—> =
Oa —“@©_-=
Figure 2-20 (In)stability of laminar flow
Figure 2-20 (from Le Méhauté, 1976) shows the origin of turbulence. Between two
fluid layers with different velocities, e.g. the outflow in Figure 2-1b, one always finds
friction. A small disturbance of the flow, regardless of its cause, will induce forces that
increase the disturbance. The curve in the flow line results in a centrifugal force (F. in
Figure 2-20b). The same curve causes a decrease of the velocity in the lower layer and
an increase in the upper layer (continuity!) resulting in a pressure difference (Fp in
Figure 2-20b), which follows from the Bernoulli equation (piezometric head + velocity
head = constant). The pressure difference and the centrifugal force work in the same
direction and tend to increase the instability. The result is an increasing undulation, the
so-called Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, see Figure 2-20c, which shows successive
stages of this instability. In the end, packets of fluid travel in every direction: the
turbulent eddies.
The centrifugal force (= p 22/R) and the pressure force (proportional to the difference
in velocity, hence to p u(Ou/éx), see Section 2.8.1) are destabilizing forces. They are
related to the non-linear convective inertia terms in the basic equations and are
expressed in the same units. The viscous damping (represented by su (@2u/é22), see also
Section 2.8.1), has a stabilizing effect as an increase in the path length in the undulation
causes an increase in viscous friction. All forces can be expressed with a characteristic
velocity difference, U, over a characteristic length, L. The ratio between destabilizing
and stabilizing forces then leads to the well-known Reynolds-number:


44 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
2
pen Piu l/h _UL (2.28)
wuiPoov
where ris the so-called dynamic viscosity and v the kinematic viscosity (v= 41/p). v
is a property of the fluid and is independent of geometry or flow velocity. So, there
will always be a value for U and L, for which the flow will be naturally unstable.
The chosen value L in the Re-number, depends on the geometry of the flow. In river
flow the depth is a logical choice; for the flow around a cylinder, the diameter is a clear
choice. For the velocity difference U, the velocity itself is the most appropriate value
(the difference between the flow and the river bed or the stagnant zone behind the
cylinder). Typical values for the transition between laminar and turbulent flow are Re
= 1000-2000. For normal circumstances, with v~ 10°° m/s, this means that the flow
is already turbulent in a flume with a depth of 0.1 m, and a velocity of a few centimetres
per second! In the hydraulic engineering practice, flow will always be turbulent.
From the foregoing we have learned that turbulence is caused by a velocity gradient
perpendicular to the main flow direction. This gradient can exist between a wall and
the flow or between two flow zones. In the first case we speak of wall turbulence and
in the second case of free turbulence, see Figure 2-21 a and b. Wall turbulence exists
where water flows along a bottom, a bank or a body. Free turbulence occurs where two
masses of water are forced to move along each other with different velocities, like the
outflow of a jet in a stagnant ambient fluid or the wake behind a body, in a hydraulic
jump or a breaking wave.
m \ i
| Us Lou,

i Au | pat

L tm Bef, = — [ |

[ly | [ae———_] "|

i ® in| © Ty, {Au

Figure 2-21 Wall turbulence and free turbulence

The energy cascade
We have seen that turbulence is induced by a velocity difference, that is too large for
the molecular viscosity which can otherwise prevent the formation of turbulent eddies.
Another way to look at turbulence is as follows. A rubber ball, falling from some
height, gains kinetic energy due to the loss of potential energy. This kinetic energy is
transferred into heat, by means of friction between the ball and the ground and internal
friction inside the ball due to deformation, until it finally comes to a halt on the ground.
Usually, a ball has to bounce several times before the energy transfer is completed.
Something similar goes on in decelerating flow. The kinetic energy of the mean motion


2. FLOW- LOADS 45
is transferred into heat by the viscous shear stress: r= p v (du/02). vhas a fixed value,
coupled with the physical properties of the fluid. Maximum values of @i/dz in the
flowing water are too small to transfer all of the kinetic energy into heat at once.
Turbulence is a means of increasing the viscosity (hence the so-called turbulent
viscosity) and can be interpreted as the process that allows the kinetic energy of the
main flow to dissipate, leaving the system as heat due to viscous friction.

Another analogy is dissolving sugar in a cup of tea. The molecular diffusion (the mechanism
that makes the sugar dissolve) and the gradient of the sugar concentration in a cup at rest
have limited values and it can take some time before all of the sugar is dissolved. Stirring is
an effective way of increasing the surface with a gradient such that diffusion can take place.
Turbulence can then be seen as the pre-processing in the treatment of "waste" kinetic
energy.
Typical length dimension (m) 0
z 1-10 0.1-1 10” 10°
Main flow ) S Heat
a Turbulent eddies Viscous
u
Big whirls have little whirls that feed on their velocity
and little whirls have smaller whirls and so on to viscosity
(L.F. Richardson)
Figure 2-22 Energy cascade in turbulent motion
Figure 2-22 shows the transfer process with some typical lengths. Only in the smallest
eddies, the velocity gradient is large enough for the viscous friction to play an effective
role in the transfer into heat.
Ilustration: Energy dissipation in hydraulic jump
To demonstrate some of the phenomena discussed in the preceding, the flow in a
hydraulic jump will be reviewed in detail. A hydraulic jump can be seen as the ultimate
energy dissipator. From the one-dimensional momentum equation one can derive:
21 2 ~ ,
nae ( 1+ 8 Fi - ') (Fn =u / fgh) (2.29)
un
Figure 2-23a shows the profile and the main characteristics as defined in basic
hydraulics. Since we are interested in what is happening inside the flow, we take a
look "under the hood" of the hydraulic jump. Figure 2-23b to f show the results of
measurements in a hydraulic jump with a Fr-value of 4, as performed by Rouse, 1958.


46 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

o— — Total energy loss, ng Vito, eK iP Ip

area ee

q Production, So <
<g> ®
TSS TEE: Dissipation

es) Velocity head of = =SS=

rg | h : turbulens Velocity head of
ea CP Q eo © @ Dinatric hdd ‘mean flow

o 4 2 3 4 5m o 41 2 3 4 5 xm
Figure 2-23 Flow and turbulence in hydraulic jump (Fr = 4, from Rouse, 1958)

Figure 2-23b shows the velocity in the jump, @, averaged over the turbulence period.
The spread of the velocity is clearly visible, with a reversal of the flow in the roller.
Figure 2-23c shows the turbulent shear stress. Where the gradient of i is maximal, the
largest values of u'w' can be found. Immediately after the roller starts, the turbulent
shear stress starts to grow quickly. The turbulent fluctuations in the flow direction are
shown in Figure 2-23d. The fluctuations also grow where the velocity gradient is large,
but they are then diffused through the water and the location of the maximum
turbulence shifts. Turbulent fluctuations in the vertical direction are slightly smaller
than those in the flow direction, but they show the same pattern. Figure 2-23e gives
the production and dissipation of turbulence, while Figure 2-23f shows the energy
content of the flow. The figures show that turbulence is indeed an intermediate phase
in the transformation of kinetic energy of the main flow into heat by means of viscous
shear stress. Velocity gradients are important in the transfer of energy from the main
motion to the turbulent eddies.
Finally, since all motion ends in heat, it is interesting to compute the raise in
temperature in a hydraulic jump. For a jump with Fr = 4, My = 1 mand m = 12.5 m/s,
given that 4000 J is needed to create a temperature rise of 1 °C in | kg water, the total
raise in temperature is less than 0.01 °C!! So, turbulence may cause a lot of excitement
in engineering circles, it leaves the water cold.


3 FLOW - Stability
> ‘ ee. .
, fs fae eee cele!

$i ! a

ek a at

PORE RE ea TED!
i. ee eprie Seek 4 ; -
ies aS Bp ee ar ee > :
RR Sa ee
Test of a bed protection (Zuurveld, TU Delft)


48 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
3.1 Introduction
The focus in this chapter will be on the stability of loose non-cohesive grains, like rock
and gravel. In addition, Section 3.5 presents some stability considerations for coherent
material. Natural rock is a very important construction material for protections. It is
almost omnipresent in the world and relatively easy to obtain. The specific mass of
natural rock normally lies between 2500 and 2700 kg/m? while extremes of more than
3000 kg/m? can be found. This is favourable for the stability and is difficult to match
by artificial material like concrete. Rocks come in all sizes, varying from millimetres
up to one or two meters, corresponding with a stone mass of around 10000 kg. Only
for very heavily attacked structures, like breakwaters in deep water with high waves,
this will be insufficient. Thus, as a construction material for hydraulic engineering,
rock is still indispensable. Sand and gravel also consist of non-cohesive, but much
smaller and rounder grains. They are not such stable construction materials, but to
determine erosion, it is necessary to know the same limits of stability.
In the following sections, the stability of stones in all kinds of flow situations will be
discussed, starting again with uniform flow and a (nearly) horizontal bottom. At Delft
University of Technology, several studies of stability in flow have been made in recent
years aiming at the translation of theoretical concepts into practical design rules. Some
of them will be mentioned when appropriate.
3.2 Uniform flow - horizontal bed
3.2.1 Basic equations
Despite many research activities and an avalanche of reports, the knowledge about the
behaviour of grains exposed to currents, is still very empirical. In an attempt to
understand the stability of loose grains, it is necessary to know which forces make a
stone move.
Two approaches are possible:
© The Jzbash approach: Consider the forces on an individual grain and try to
determine the balance of these forces. When active forces (by flow, turbulence,
etc.) become larger than the passive forces (gravity, friction between grains)
balance is lost, and the grain starts to move.
© The Shields approach: Consider the friction force caused by the water on the
bed (i.e. on an area significantly larger than one grain). When this force exceeds
a certain critical value the bed starts to erode and grains start to move.
Izbash
For the Izbash approach we start with turbulent flow and a (nearly) horizontal bed.


3. FLOW - STABILITY 49
eis! Lice
a SS =
acs z
=e ——
is Fs
—, a
Cbs
er oe
wr
Figure 3-1 Forces on a grain in flow
It is easy to imagine that there is a critical value of the flow velocity at which a grain
is no longer in equilibrium and starts to move. It is not so easy to indicate exactly how
the flow induces movement and how the grains resist it. Figure 3-1 shows the forces
acting on a grain. A drag force by the flow on a stone is easy to imagine. The concept
of a shear stress for a single stone is somewhat more troublesome; it seems more
appropriate for a certain area of a flat bed with relatively small grains. A lift force is
mainly caused by the curvature of the flow around a grain. The various flow forces on
the grain can be expressed as follows:
7 ce: = 1 2
Drag force: Fp=>Cp Pt Ap
1 a
Shear force: Fs=5 Cp Pw ds Fe pyrd? G.1)
. 1
Lift force: F',= pias Pyt Ap
in which C; are coefficients of proportionality and Aj are the exposed surface areas. So,
all forces are proportional to the square of the velocity (defined somewhere in the
vicinity of the grain) and since the grain surfaces are proportional to the square of a
representative size d (to be defined later on), the resultant load can be expressed in one
term where the constant of proportionality remains unknown.
The same can be done for the equilibrium. Here again, several resisting forces and
mechanisms can be present. The lift force is balanced directly by the (submerged!)
weight. Shear and drag, are balanced, either by the moment around A or by the friction
force (which is like the shear a somewhat peculiar notion for a single grain). It does
not matter whether the horizontal, vertical or moment equilibrium is considered, only
one proportionality between load and strength remains:
EH=0: Fos =fxW=Fp |
EV =0: F, =W pywedx(p,—p,jgd? (3.2)
EM=0: Fpg:O(d)=W-O(d) |


50 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
The velocity used is the critical velocity: ue since we are dealing here with a stability
parameter (see Chapter 1). This leads to a dimensionless relation between load and
strength:

wea (PPe)ed-aed > uw=KAgd (B.3)

Pw
All formulae on grain stability come down to this proportionality. The constant in this
relation has to be found experimentally and that is where the problem starts. Izbash
(1932) expressed relation (3.3) as (with equivalent forms, used in other sources):
2
uc=12 J2hgd or “Sa=17 or Ad=0.7 4 (3.4)
Jagd 2g

The velocity in the Izbash formula is the velocity acting on the stone, but Izbash did
not define the place of the velocity, neither is it very clear how the diameter is defined.
Because Izbash did his tests with big stones in relatively shallow water, one may
assume that the diameter in his formula is equal to the nominal diameter dh (see Section
3.2.3). For application of the Izbash formula one has to determine the velocity near the
bed. One may assume a logarithmic velocity distribution and calculate the velocity
near the bed. One may use the formulae given in Section 2.3. But it is unclear at exactly
which place one should determine the velocity. For shallow water and big stones this
is less critical.
Because only the velocity near the stone is an input value for this formula, this formula
is used especially in cases of non-uniform flow or in conditions where the velocity
does not depend on an equilibrium between flow force and bed friction force (as in
case of water jets). In other cases the Shields approach is recommended.
Shields
Probably the best-known formula for uniform flow is the one by Shields from 1936.
Shields gives a relation between a dimensionless shear stress and the so-called particle
Reynolds-number:

y, ee a Te _

° “strength (p,—p,)ed> (p-Py)gd—
sth (p.— py)g (Ps = Pw) G3)
uz, used
= Je = (Ree) = f| Me
nea (Re) #( 7 )

Shields chose the shear stress as the active force. We know that this is not necessarily
the right choice, but in practice the differences are not so important. Note that the grain
diameter and the shear velocity appear on both sides of the formula. ye is usually called
the Shields parameter and is a stability parameter which is defined using a critical


3. FLOW - STABILITY 51
value of the (shear) velocity. When the diameter present in a bed and the actual
velocity, instead of the critical velocity, are used, y'is a mobility parameter. Note: the
subscript c is not applied consequently. It is always necessary to be aware of the use
of y! The particle Reynolds-number indicates whether the grain protrudes into the
turbulent boundary layer or stays within the viscous sub-layer. It differs from the
normal Reynolds-number and says nothing about the flow characteristics of the flow
as a whole (which is usually turbulent).

o 2 051.0 §10 50 mm

0 Te TT
f ea ieee ieee nl | SAH eee

7 CET Tr nn 7 SA TO Tn
ool LITTIM TTT TTT gg ETT TINT

1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000
Re.=u.d/y ——> d.=d(Ag/v?)'3 —>
Figure 3-2 Critical shear stress according to Shields - van Rijn

Figure 3-2 shows two presentations of the Shields relation. Figure 3-2a is the classical
form. For high Re+-numbers (large grains, larger than the viscous sub-layer, turbulent
flow around the grain), yc is no longer dependent on Res and becomes constant with a
value of about 0.055. The lower we-values of intermediate Re+-numbers (indicating a
lower stability) are sometimes explained with the idea that the shear stress dominates
the drag forces, giving a larger arm for the moment, leading to a less favourable
situation. For very low Res-numbers (very small grains), ye increases linearly with
Re+! compensating for the square of the velocity in Equation (3.5) which is no longer
valid in the viscous sub-layer.
Figure 3-2b gives the same stability relation, but now Res is replaced by a
dimensionless particle diameter, ds, as used e.g. by Van Rijn, 1984. The elimination
of uc from the particle Re-number is possible because every grain diameter has a
corresponding value of us:. d+ can be seen as the ratio of the submerged weight of a
grain to the viscous forces. Van Rijns presentation of the Shields relation has the
advantage that it avoids iteration on ure.
Because g (9.8 m/s?) and v (1.33x10° m2/s) are constant and also the variation in A is
very limited, one may consider (Ag/v2) as a constant and one may plot we as a function
of d only. Sce the upper scale in Figure 3-2b.
This implies that for grains larger than approximately 7 mm ye can be used as a
constant without having to iterate with the diameter in the Shields curve. This is
important, since it indicates that for stones in a normal bed protection one does not
need to use the Shields curve, but may use a constant value for ye. Another important
conclusion is that no scale effects will be present in tests when the stone size in the
model exceeds 6-7 mm.


52 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 3-1
Many attempts have been made to determine when the turbulent peak velocities are applied
the constant of proportionality in Equation instead of the average value. The same is true
(3.3) analytically. For instance by considering _ when the moment equilibrium around point A
the horizontal equilibrium and equating the in Figure 3-1 is considered. This is further
possible friction force to the tangent of the complicated by the fact that the protrusion of
angle of repose of the material: 3Fi=W.tang. an individual stone highly determines the
With tang~ | for rocks this leads to values of protection by the surrounding stones and,
the critical velocity which are much too high, hence, the stability. The figure shows the
even influence of protrusion on the value of y. as
03 found in experiments (Breusers/Raudkivi,
A 1991, see also Wiberg/ Smith, 1987). The
a differences in protrusion of grains in a bed
Ve LN Ap and, more in general, the differences between
N the size and shape in a natural material, make
\" | an analytical approach of stone stability a
INS dead end. In fact, the whole concept of a
00 = critical velocity is a doubtful notion. The next
030 0s 10 | :

a. Relative protrusion (pid) Section will dea with that problem.
Removing w+ from the right hand side of the equation means that + only remains in
the left hand side. So, calculation of w+ is still needed; this is done with the method as
described in Section 2.3. Realise that the derivation of the formula for w+ in Section
2.3 is based on the assumption that there is an equilibrium flow (equilibrium between
acting force of gravity and resisting force of bed friction). With other words, the
Chezy-equation has to be valid. This implies that the Shields approach is only valid
when the Chezy-equation is applicable. This is the case for permanent, uniform flow.
In case the flow slightly deviates from uniform flow, this can be corrected by adding
a correction factor (Section 3.4), but when large correction factors may be needed, the
Shields approach may lead to significant errors. In those cases an Izbash approach
may more appropriate (but it has its own drawbacks).

Example 3-1

What is u*: for sand (p= 2650 kg/m’) with dso = 2 mm?

In the “classical” Shields-curve (Figure 3-2a) uc appears in both axes, so iteration is
necessary. Suppose you don't have the faintest idea how much u‘. is and you make a wild
guess, say 1 m/s. Re- then becomes: 1x0.002/1.33x10% = 1500 > ye = 0.055 — Ure =
\V(1.65x9.81x0.002x0.055) = 0.042 m/s Re- = 63 — ure = 0.036 m/s. This is also the final
value. Using Figure 3-2b, you would have found directly d- = 0.002x(1.65x9.81/(1.33«10"
8)2)18 = 42 > yo = 0.04 —> ure = 0.036 mis.


3. FLOW - STABILITY 53
3.2.2 Threshold of motion
In the previous section, a critical velocity was mentioned in relation to stability. The
idea of a critical value of the velocity, however, is a complicated affair as you can see
when an experiment is carried out in a flume. With a low velocity one or more stones
will move a little. They are probably stones with a high protrusion or an otherwise
unfavourable position. Having found a new position, these stone will not move any-
more. So, this can not be seen as the threshold of motion for the whole bed. After
increasing the flow velocity, here and there some stones will move a certain distance.
A further increase of the velocity will eventually lead to transport of stones
everywhere. The situation is then clearly beyond the threshold of motion. So, how can
this threshold be defined?
® ® TTT TTT Ty
pts Yeo Sel | | eo
\ hee Pht} | |
xs oo LL f=t-t- 1 TT T |
% ji +t 1 10 400 7000
— > Re,
Figure 3-3 Load and strength distribution and extrapolation of transport
In fact, no such thing as a critical velocity exists! Due to the irregularities of natural
stones, the position, the protrusion and hence the exposure and the stability of every
stone in the bed is different. The flow itself is turbulent, which means that peak
pressures and velocities can be much higher than the average value. In theory there is
no limit. Figure 3-3a shows the probability distribution of occurring and critical shear
stress for a given situation. The average shear stress in the flow is lower than the
average critical shear stress. Due to the deviations from the mean value of the load and
the strength, movement of stones can still occur. It can be seen that there is no critical
value below which movement is impossible.
The threshold of movement is a subjective matter when judged in an experiment.
Figure 3-3b shows the Shields graph of Figure 3-2a together with the results of an
investigation into incipient motion by Breusers (Delft Hydraulics, 1969). 7 transport
stages were discerned:
0. no movement at all
1. occasional movement at some locations
2. frequent movement at some locations
3. frequent movement at several locations
4. frequent movement at many locations
5. frequent movement at all locations
6. continuous movement at all locations
7. general transport of the grains.
It appeared that the Shields criterion fits stage 6 rather well.


54 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
In fact ye is not a physical constant, but a value found by curve fitting. This means that
yc has a mean and standard deviation. According to Van der Wal (1990) the standard
deviation o(y) is in the order of 15%, For a designer this means that if one has to
design a bed protection for a given velocity where the transport stage 6 should not be
exceeded with a probability of 10%, one should not use ye = 0.055, but ye = 0.055—
1.64x(0.15x0.055) = 0.041 (The value 1.64 comes from the Normal distribution with
a probability of 10%). When a bed protection is designed in this way, one may
concluded two things:
1. The probability that stage 6 is exceeded is in the order of 10%
2. The probability that stage 1 is exceeded is in the order of 50%.
It means that very often one has occasional movement, but seldom continuous
movement at all locations.
Shields found his values by extrapolating a measured transport of material to zero.
Figure 3-4a gives an idea of the transport situation and an explanation of the result as
obtained by Shields.
1
5
8
5 LLL LA
£ 7 a" |
BEPAre
10°} 1
a
Bae ag
O 0.025 0.05 0.075 01 0.01002 005 01 02 05 1.0
© —>? © —> ¥
Figure 3-4 Threshold of motion: extrapolation of transport to zero (a) and Paintal (b)
Paintal, 1971, performed similar tests (for rather coarse material) to Shields’ tests, but
did not extrapolate his transport measurements to 0. Instead, he defined the transport
per m width, qs, see Figure 3-4b:
eo 18) 16
g, =6.56-10'8 y'6 (for y < 0.05) ith gf <i
. with q, = ————
q.=13y> (for y > 0.05) Aga?
(3.6)
Note that y is now used as a mobility parameter in a transport equation. This relation
gives a transport for every non zero shear stress. But it decreases with the 16" power
of the shear stress, which means with the 32" power of the velocity. Most sediment-
transport formulae have a power relation of 3 to 5 with the velocity, which is in line
with the relation by Paintal for y> 0.05. So, the Shields criterion for y. could be seen
as the start of sediment transport or erosion. Both the description of stage 6 by Delft


3. FLOW - STABILITY 55
Hydraulics and the kink in the Paintal relation seem to justify this. Moreover, Shields
performed his research to find the beginning of sediment transport. Interesting
reflections on Shields and the threshold of motion can be found in Buffington/
Montgomery, 1997, and Buffington, 1999.
Example 3-2

A value of 0.03 for ye is considered a safe choice for the threshold of motion. For stones

with a characteristic diameter of 0.4 m this gives qs = 6.5610" x y'® x \(Agd*) = 3 x 108

m*/m/s. This is equivalent with 86400 x q,/d° = 4 stones per day per m width. The design

velocity for an apron is usually a value which occurs only in exceptional cases e.g. with a

chance of 1% per year. This makes such a transport quantity acceptable. Moreover, this is

the transport per m width, not per m®. This example also shows that there is always a chance

of some damage and inspection and maintenance is necessary for every structure.
De Boer, 1998, did similar tests to Paintal’s for rip-rap aprons with low values of y.
He found much lower transports than Paintal and he also found that the transport
stopped completely after some hours for y-values lower than 0.06. Above 0.06 the
transport went on continuously. The transport process stopped because moving stones
found a new location where they were stable enough for the present load. Especially
small stones were trapped by the bed. De Boer also varied the roughness of the bed
and found that the transport on a densely packed bed, which is relatively smooth, was
larger than on a loose bed.
Although there are some doubts regarding the absolute values of the Paintal transport
formula, the message is obvious: there is no clear threshold of motion and there will
always be some transport of material. The choice of yz depends on the amount of
transport that is acceptable, hence yc can also be regarded as a damage number.
3.2.3 Stone dimensions
For stability and erosion, the size of a stone or sand grain is an important parameter.
There is, however, a lot of ambiguity when it comes to defining the size of a single
stone or grain, let alone characterizing a shipload of material. This has to do with the
shape of natural materials which can resemble spheres, discs, cubes or cylinders with
rounded or very angular surface, making the definition of one size complicated.
Another complication is the way the dimensions of a grain are determined in practice.
For small grains it is customary to use sieves, which is impossible for large stones. A
large rock can be weighed which is, in turn, impractical for small grains. One can
imagine that in stability, the weight of a grain is the dominating factor. This has led to
the use of the so-called nominal diameter in hydraulic engineering during the last
decades. This is simply the side of a cube with the same volume as the stone
considered:

d, = VW =3[M/p 3.7)


56 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
A third complication comes from the fact that natural grains all differ in size, the
grading of the material. Sand contains smaller and larger grains and stone from a
quarry is sorted into classes. This can be represented by a sieve curve or any other
distribution curve, see also Appendix A. To characterize such a class with one
parameter, usually the median value is applied. dso or dhso indicates that 50 % of the
weight ofall grains is smaller or larger than that value. Since the large grains contribute
more to the total weight, the number of smaller grains will be much greater than the
number of larger grains.
Boutovski, 1998, studied the influence of shape and grading on the stability of stones
in flow. For stones with narrow or wide grading (dss/dis = 1.4 - 3.1) he found no
difference in stability when dso was used as the characteristic dimension. For a mixture
containing 80% stones with a disk or cylinder shape, the same stability was found as
for "normal" stones, provided again that d,so was used. The use of dyso has become
common practice for natural protection material. For small grains, like sand, the sieve
diameter remains the standard, indicated as dso. d is normally 20 % larger than dn.
Appendix A gives more detail. More background information on stone dimensions is
given in Chapter 3 of the Rock Manual (CUR, CIRIA, CETMEF, 2007).
In more older research it is often not very clear how the applied diameter is defined,
leading to some uncertainties when interpreting the results.
3.2.4 Waterdepth
With the uniform flow relations of Chapter 2, Equation (3.5) can be rewritten in the
same format as the Izbash formula: w+ (the shear velocity) = 7 v@/C, where 7 is the
velocity averaged over the vertical or the cross-section, see Chapter 2. This leads to:
te = Ole (3.8)
VA ans0 dg
Note that, via C, the waterdepth now enters the relation implicitly as, given a bed
roughness, C increases with the waterdepth: C = 18 log(12 R/k,). ky is the so-called
equivalent sand roughness. Unfortunately, this introduces another uncertainty in the
idea of a threshold of motion. k, depends on the gradation and on the stacking of the
stones, which is in turn determined by the way the bed is constructed. Section 3.2.5
will give some more information. In this section we will simply use k= 2d,so. With k;
= 2dnso Equation (3.8) becomes: iie/WAgdnso) = 5.75-log(6 h/dnso): Ve.
In Figure 3-5 this relation has been drawn for several values of y. and compared with
Izbash, Equation (3.4). In this comparison the velocity used in the Izbash-formula is
the depth averaged velocity. Shields gives a greater permissible velocity at greater
depths. This has also been found in experiments, making Shields "superior" to Izbash.
The following remarks, however, need to be considered.


3. FLOW - STABILITY 57
1 ne ~ ] © 2 ——-1—
wooee B=]
ear
ae ee 0.08
2 a ctl |
a, PTI Uiceos! TIT
ae ciiill Tl 0%
Wood Fase TUTE TT TTT
0 0.00
1 10 100 012 3 4 5 6
Wo, > Wide
Figure 3-5 Influence of waterdepth on critical velocity
The favourable influence of the waterdepth on the critical velocity cannot go on
infinitely, since the logarithmic velocity profile in natural streams with large depths is
only found in the lower half of the depth. //d,so= 100 can be seen as a safe upper limit.
For small waterdepths, somewhere around h/dyso = 5, Izbash gives higher permissible
velocities than Shields. For h/dhso < 5, Ashida, 1973, found a considerable increase in
Ye, see Figure 3-5b. This more favourable value of y can possibly be attributed to the
fact that the whole concept of a shear stress on the grains is no longer valid and the
flow exerts only a drag force on the grains. As we have seen in Section 3.2.1, drag and
shear are not treated separately in the empirical relations. Another possible explanation
comes from the turbulent eddies: at waterdepths in the order of magnitude of the stone
diameter, d, the maximum size of these eddies are in the same order of magnitude as
d. For larger waterdepths, the eddy dimensions can and will grow, leading to a heavier
attack on the bed.
3.2.5. Practical application
Normally in a design situation, a stone class to withstand a certain extreme value for
the velocity has to be found. Equation (3.8) has been reworked for that purpose:
— —2
ue _ CWWe _ Ue
= D> dys0 = z G.9)
Yasdnso Vg yeAC
This formula is the basis for all stability relations in flow situations. In the coming
sections additions will be given for flow situations other than uniform flow with a
horizontal bed. In many of these situations, the load on protection elements is very
complex, but for a first estimate the Shields relation with correction parameters can be
applied. It has been decided to reserve the symbol y, for the stability parameter in
uniform flow on a horizontal bottom and to include deviations in extra parameters.
However, some decisions remain to be made on how to deal with parameters like
roughness and threshold of motion. We start with the roughness. For a bed that is made
under favourable conditions, e.g. on a dry and visible subsoil, k» ~ 2daso seems
achievable. Lammers, 1997, and Boutovski, 1998, found for a flat bed in a flume


58 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
experiment: kr ~ 6diso (without side-wall corrections). Van Rijn, 1986, proposed
k, = 3doo which is about 4-5 dyso. When the stones are dumped with barges, the
irregularities, and hence the bed roughness, can be much larger. On the other hand,
when stones move in that case, the irregularities will be flattened again. This also has
to do with the choice of ye.
In Section 3.2.2 we saw that there will always be some movement when a certain value
of yc has been chosen. Below a level of 0.06, De Boer, 1998, found transport stopped
after some time. Lammers, 1997, also found something similar. Figure 3-6a shows the
results of an experiment with a very rough bed (artificial ripples of loose stones) which
was loaded twice with an increasing flow velocity. The first time, the roughness
decreased from 18dns0 to 6dns0 (which was also the value found for a flat bed) because
the transport of stones has lead to a flatter bed. The numbers next to the curve represent
the transport stages from Section 3.2.2. After this, the flow was stopped and was
increased again. Now the roughness kept the flat-bed value, but much more
importantly, the transport stage numbers were much lower. This was due to
strengthening of the bed. Stones in an initially unfavourable position, found better
locations and the bed as a whole became more stable.
The choice of ye remains subjective as long as there is no quantitative probabilistic
information on optimal costs of construction and maintenance. The definition of
Serviceability Limit State and Ultimate Limit State is therefore ambiguous. For the
time being, given all the uncertainties, a practical choice has to be made for y.and for
ky.
Our @o0e TTT)
av ai =
yo] time ‘ t ee
2 es 5 0.03 | [otery tt |
Sg] on zutime.e | c Lat] TT TT |
o 17) se CE TTT ttt
5 oo LILLE
w: 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.1 012 3 4 5 6 7
Kd —>
Figure 3-6 Roughness and the threshold of motion (left: from Lammers, 1997)
The result in Example 3-3 would also have been found with a y-value of 0.045 anda
roughness of 6 times dso or with y. = 0.04 and k, = 4.5dhso. Equation (3.9) shows that
different combinations of values of y.and k, can give the same diameter. Figure 3-6b
shows the relation between k,/d,so and ye for the computed diameter in Example 3-3.
Given the outcome of the research by Lammers, 1997, a choice for a high roughness
value and a high y,-value seems logical. The result, however, is not very sensitive to
the choice as long as a reasonable combination of the two values is used. y. = 0.03


3. FLOW - STABILITY 59
and k, = 2dnso is therefore a practical choice in case a statically stable protection
needs to be designed.

Example 3-3
Given a (design) velocity of 4 m/s, a waterdepth of 10 m and A = 1.65, what stone size (dso)
is necessary to withstand this (uniform) flow?
We take a y«-value of 0.03 and a roughness of 2 times dnso. Since the roughness in Equation
(3.9) depends on the still unknown diameter, we have to iterate. So we have to start with a
guess of either a value for dnso or for C. We start with C=50 \m/s (any guess is good). From
this we compute dnso = 47/0.03x1.65x50? = 0.129 m. From there: C = 18 log(12x10/2x0.129)
= 48 \m/s. From Equation (3.9) again: dnso = 47/0.03x 1.6548? = 0.14 m. And so on. Finally
we find dnso = 0.146 m. Using common sense, this iteration will converge in 3 or 4
calculations. From appendix A we find that a grading of 90/250 mm will do.
3.3. Sloping bed
The relations in Section 3.2 are valid for stones on a horizontal bed. A sloping bed will
decrease the strength. When the slope is equal to the angle of repose, g, a stone is
already on the threshold of motion and any load will induce movement. Figure 3-7
gives an idea of the value of ¢ for various materials. When the bed is between
horizontal and the angle of repose, the diameter calculated with Equation (3.8) needs
a correction, as is explained in this section.
To determine the influence of a slope on the stability, it is assumed that for a stone on
a flat bed the critical flow force, or the strength, can be expressed as
F(0) = Wtan ¢, see Figure 3-8a. This implies that the friction factor of a stone on a horizontal
bed is equal to the tangent of the angle of repose. As we have seen in
Intermezzo 3-1, this is not correct but the slope correction factor we are going to derive
will not be used absolutely but relative to the horizontal situation.
8 40 =
ns aan
g hl
3 | ao et
* | eae
2 —y*
unded + angulal
rounded
20 | | ff ft]
0.1 1 10 100 1000
——._ d (mm)
Figure 3-7 Angle of repose for non-cohesive materials (Simons, 1957)


S0_CINTRODUCTION TO BED, BANKAND SHORE PROTECTION
Weosatand ia XJ |
—vs se ase ¢
a7 se
; [ ot | ON]
@ o| joe
w © Oe oot. 1 IN |
a 0 10 20 30 40 50
——— « (degrees)
Figure 3-8 Influence of slope on stability
The reduction of strength can be divided into two components. There is a destabilizing
component of the weight along the slope (W sina), while the effective weight
perpendicular to the slope becomes less (W cosa). In case of a slope in the direction
of the flow (Figure 3-8b) the strength then becomes: F(a) = W cosa tang - W sina.
(Note: when the flow is reverse, the situation becomes more stable and F(a) = Weosa
tang + W sina). The relation between F(a) and F(0) now gives the reduction factor to
be applied on the strength:
F(a) _ Wcosa tang — Wsina _ sin(? — a)
Ky = aS = ——___——_ = —_— (3.10)
F(0) Wtand sing
For a side slope with angle a, the same procedure can be followed, see Figure 3-8c,
but now the components have to be added vectorially: F(R? = F(a)? + (W sin @&? =
(W cos tan 9). This leads to a strength: F(a)? = (W cos atan g) — (W sin @)? and
the reduction factor becomes:
F(a) cos*a tan? — sin?a sin?a@
K. =p = | -——, — = |i-— B.D)
F(0) tan? sin?
In Figure 3-8d, both of the reduction factors K,y, for a slope in flow direction, and Ks.,
for a slope perpendicular to the flow, have been drawn for ¢ = 40°. It is clear that a
slope in the flow direction is much less favourable.
Note: K, is a correction factor for the diameter and has to be applied in the denominator
of Equation (3.9). K, represents a reduction of strength, hence K, < 1.
Both equations have been checked in laboratory experiments. Chiew/Parker, 1994,
gave the results for a slope in flow direction, Equation (3.10). The results are quite
satisfactory for slopes not too close to the angle of repose. Slopes with the flow in an
upward direction, making the stones more stable, were also investigated with the same
result. Delft Hydraulics, 1970 gives some results for laboratory experiments with
gravel on slopes 1:3 and 1:4 perpendicular to the flow. Here too, the results were
satisfactory.


3. FLOW- STABILITY 61
Wijgerse, 2000, investigated how to deal with Equation (3.11) in practice. The choice
to be made is where on the slope, the velocity and the depth have to be used. At the
toe, the waterdepth is maximal which is favourable but the velocity decreases from the
toe to the waterline, so it is not clear which combination of velocity and depth is
dominant. The result of this study was that the situation at the toe is normative.
3.4 Non-uniform flow
Relations like the one given by Shields are valid for (stationary), uniform flow. When
the flow is not uniform, the load will be higher locally. For large hydraulic structures
this can be investigated with a scale model and in the future possibly with advanced
computational models in which the turbulent velocities can be determined at every
location. For relatively small structures and for preliminary designs, the higher load
can be expressed in a factor for the velocity, Ky, in stability relations.
In accelerating flow we have seen an increase in shear stress and a decrease of
(relative) turbulence; in decelerating flow it is the other way round (see Chapter 2).
For these phenomena in vertical and horizontal constrictions, only the results of
empirical research are available. With the information on fluid motion, as outlined in
Chapter 2, these results will now be discussed.
3.4.1 Acceleration
Vertical constriction — Overflow
Figure 3-9a shows the various zones that can be distinguished when a flow passes a
vertical constriction. In the uniform flow zone, relations like the one by Shields are
valid. For stones on top of a sill, one might expect a more unfavourable relation,
because of the increased shear stress due to the acceleration. In experiments has been
found that the first damage on a sill occurs at the downstream crest. There, the velocity
is maximal and the waterdepth and strength minimal (because of the downward slope
in flow direction). When a single stone on that crest has a protruding position, it will
move at almost any velocity, reshaping the crest somewhat. This is usually not
considered as damage. Figure 3-9b gives experimental results, compared with the
Shields formula for the same values of ye of Figure 3-5, using the velocity on top of
the sill (which is of course larger than in the upstream cross-sections). The
experimental flume tests were done in the framework of the Deltaworks, see Delft
Hydraulics, 1985. All measured critical velocities lie above the line for ye = 0.04
indicating that the relation between critical velocity and stone diameter is no less
favourable than for a situation with uniform flow.


62 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
® ©4 be pee
Shields y.= 904 Lier
uniform flow acceleration deceleration Experimental results 4-1 EE
| P eerie z= Saul
: ETI © taasn tod)
[Sm on, SAFI = tan tbe
lillies
7 4 10 100
his) —o
Figure 3-9 Investigation of stability on top of a sill (Delft Hydraulics, 1985)
This can be explained by the fact that the peak velocities are lower than in uniform
flow. w+3o = (1+3r)u while r is lower in the acceleration zone than in uniform flow.
Beside the earlier mentioned equation by Izbash for a flat bed, Izbash/Khaldre, 1970,
gives a second equation for (protruding) stones on top of a dam. The Izbash line for
dams in Figure 3-9 can be seen as a conservative value of the stability.
When a sill becomes relatively high, especially when critical flow can occur, the whole
flow-pattern becomes completely different. The flow lines over the sill are strongly
curved and at the downstream crest the water flow through the stones becomes
important. In that case working with velocities is useless. In Delft Hydraulics, 1985,
many experimental results were re-analyzed and for higher dams the head difference
across the sill appeared to be a satisfactory parameter, see Figure 3-10b. Moreover, the
head difference, (Juhu), can be more easily defined and measured for high dams.
‘As a comparison, Shields (Equation (3.9)), has been reworked in the format of Figure
3-10, with k; = 2dhso and y = 0.03, using the Bernoulli equation with an expression
for the velocity on top of the sill and a discharge coefficient, 1, taken from the same
Delft Hydraulics-experiments:
22 ha 3.12
u2=p? 2g (Iy hg) =(0.5 + 0.04 “4) 2 g (iy, —hy) (3.12)
nso
Wm TT
36
3 ye | exerimenty resus |
—— <4
h| h, h, < aa"
A.dps0 I o
=10 0 10 20
byl dace
Figure 3-10 Stability on top of sill and head difference (Delft Hydraulics, 1985)
This relation has been drawn in Figure 3-10b, using hy and w from Equation (3.12).
For relatively high waterdepths downstream, Shields is satisfactory and on the safe


3. FLOW - STABILITY 63
side as we had found earlier. For low waterdepths downstream, Figure 3-10b should
be used, where the stability parameter is now defined as (In—ha)/Adyso. For high
waterdepths downstream, the stability simply becomes: (/hy—/a)/Adyso = 2, while for
low waterdepths the value increases greatly, see Figure 3-10b. ha/dnso ~ 5 can be seen
as a transition point, which also appears to be the transition between critical and sub-
critical flow.

Vertical constriction - Underflow
Figure 3-11 shows flow under a weir as investigated for the Eastern Scheldt storm
surge barrier. In the flow contraction under the weir, the stability relation (3.9) matches
when y= 0.03 is applied and the contracted jet height is used as the waterdepth. So,
here too, no extra coefficients are necessary to calculate the stability.
hy = 6.5m
u, = 6.5 mis ace
—_ d= 0.9 m, A = 1.8 (1-3 ton)
Figure 3-11 Stability with flow under weir
Horizontal constriction
A groyne or a dam causes an accelerated flow around the obstruction. Moreover,
stones on the groyne head lie on a slope perpendicular to the flow, for which a
correction factor has to be applied, see Equation (3.11). In Delft Hydraulics, 1986, the
stability in that situation was analyzed, based on experiments on horizontal closure of
ariver with stones. The stability can be approached with Shields and a slope correction
(Equation (3.9) and (3.11):
eee fe fiSe aso 2 foc (3.13)
VAgdnso g sin"? dso
‘The damage appears to occur at half depth, so C becomes 18 log (12:% h)/ 2dyso = 18
log (3//dys0). For closure works in a river and with a= 30° and ¢= 40° (normal values
for a rockfill dam), the stability parameter reduces to the right hand side of
Equation(3.13). Figure 3-12 compares Equation (3.13) and experimental measure-
ments. The result is similar to Figure 3-9: the situation is no less favourable than a
uniform flow situation (using the velocity in the gap).


64 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
q2
Fy —
a f _——=——|
TS SE ea eI |_| ae
= 2 | Za
> } . = 0.03,0.04,0.05 | |
first, damage
ay come PTT
v W A-A 0
0 5 10 15 20 25
—>_ 1,5
Figure 3-12 Stability of stones on head of dam or groyne
In a nutshell: in an accelerated flow, the stability of loose stones is no less than in a
uniform flow, provided the local velocity is used in the Shields relation. Or, when
working with a velocity factor, Ky, as indicated in the first paragraph of Section 3.4,
the design value with regard to the local velocity in an accelerating flow is 1.
3.4.2 Deceleration
In decelerating flow the flow situation differs completely from that in uniform flow or
in accelerating flow. Flow separation and a mixing layer often occur and in all cases
the turbulence level is much higher due to the overall loss of kinetic energy. Now the
velocity coefficient, with regard to the local velocity, is expected to be higher than 1.
K, is defined as:
u, uniform flow
Ky=——_— G.14)
u, with load increase
in which: 7,, is the vertically averaged critical velocity in uniform flow and jis the
velocity in the case with a structure. jz, can be vertically averaged at some location
or averaged in a cross-section, see Intermezzo 3-2.
Note: The critical velocity in the denominator of Equation (3.14) is lower than the
critical value in uniform flow (the numerator). This means that, with some obstacle,
stones begin to move at a lower velocity in the flume. It does not mean that the strength
of the bed is lower. The bed remains the same, but the load increases. Language can
be a pitfall!


3. FLOW- STABILITY 65
Intermezzo 3-2
4 »2
+ Uy —
| le
Inan empty flume (uniform flow, lefthand m/s, giving K, = 0.78/0.72 = 1.08. In uniform
side of figure) for some stone size we find flow there is hardly a problem to define the
acritical velocity, 77,,= 0.78 m/s. With an critical velocity but when a structure is
abutment in the same flume, which blocks Present, a choice has to be made. A value for
30% of the width, we find a critical Kv cam never be seen apart from its definition,
velocity averaged over the cross-section of Which becomes clear from the example
the flume of 0.40 mis (1 in right hand side above. Only when a local (maximum)
of figure). Hence, Ky = 0.78/0.40 = 1.95. It velocity is used, Ky will represent the extra
is also possible to use the average velocity turbulence. When using the average upstream
in the cross-section at the abutment (2) Velocity, w (= Q/A), Ky will be "polluted" by
where the velocity is 1/0.7 times higher. the variations in the velocity field. For 2-
This leads to K, = 0.78/(0.4/0.7) = 137, dimensional flow situations, this difficulty
Under critical flow conditions the ‘0eS not exist, see the section on vertical
maximum velocity along the abutment (3) striction.
was measured to be 0.72
In the following examples we will determine Ky from Equation (3.14) and check
Equation (3.17). When, in future, sophisticated flow models become available and the
turbulent velocities are known at every location, it will be possible to design bed
protections without scale models. Now, Equations like (3.17) serve mainly to get some
insight into the processes. For the time being, we will have to work with rough
estimates of the velocity coefficient for simple structures and preliminary designs and
a scale model to check calculations for complicated structures.
Vertical constriction — Overflow
4
( i
@ ® “Tiyenothy-o) }
uy t 8
—_ mixing layer Ky
ae 22 (2 Experiments
a -
Bietghs 1
reattachment poifit N60
0
0 .26 60 .75 1.0 1.26
— Ding
Figure 3-13 Stability downstream of a sill
Figure 3-13a shows the situation behind a sill with flow separation and a mixing layer.
We focus on the area near the reattachment point, where the maximum flow attack can
be expected. We could try to find an expression for the velocity and the turbulence at
the reattachment point, using the relations for a mixing layer as described in Chapter


66 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
2. An even more crude approach is to assume that the total energy of the flow from the
top of the sill remains constant up to the reattachment point and that the stability there
can be described with the velocity on top of the sill. From continuity we find:
m(f—D)aurhn > map wn > Kx (3.15)
where K,.is related to the local velocity (vertically averaged) at the reattachment point,
up. Figure 3-13b shows a surprising agreement (given the crudeness of the assumption)
between this equation and experiments (see Delft Hydraulics, 1985) for sills with a
height up to 65% of the water depth. The load increases till the situation of critical
flow over the sill is reached, which is normally the case when D/h2 0.75. When D/hy
increases further, the total energy loss also increases, but the "extra" loss, compared
with subcritical flow, is absorbed at the downstream slope of the sill. This approach is
only valid for the heaviest attacked point beyond the sill, near the reattachment point.
Wang/Fontijn, 1993, found, based on measurements of forces on an element
downstream of a backward facing step, that the heaviest attack took place 10 to 20 step
heights downstream. De Gunst, 1999, also investigated stability downstream of a
backward facing step with D/hy = 0.34 for which K, = 1.5 according to Equation (3.15).
De Gunst found K, ~ 1.2 with Equation (3.14), which is in the lower region of the
experimental results of Figure 3-13b (a sill possibly gives a less favourable flow
situation than a backward facing step). With turbulence measurements and Equation
(3.17), De Gunst found K, ~ 1.2, so the attack on the bed is in line with the idea of a
peak velocity. (The definition of K, is unambiguous in case of a vertical constriction)
Further downstream, the situation tends to uniform flow again and K, can be computed
using the turbulence decay relation as given in Section 2.5.2.
Example 3-4

In the situation of Figure 3-13 the downstream waterdepth ha is 3 m, and the sill height Dis

2m above the bed. The velocity on top of the sill is us = 3 m/s; the velocity downstream uz

is 1 mis. With Shields (without applying K-factors) the required dr on the sill is 0.4 m and

near the reattachment point dy = 0.04 m. Because D/h2 is 2/3, the value of Ky at the

reattachment pointis 3. Including this into the Shields equation leads to a required stonesize

at the reattachment point of 0.36 m.
Vertical constriction - Underflow
For deceleration in underflow situations no data on stone stability is available.
Therefore we look at the stability downstream of a hydraulic jump, for which Huis in
“t Veld, 1987, gives some examples based on research by Kumin, see Figure 3-14.


3. FLOW - STABILITY 67
® @*
test results a
I +, et
ai
Po 14+ 3tiyngf 1431,
i x 1 La °
1 5 10 15
——> hh,
© i, 7 1] |] TJ
—— test results
K 8 \. sees COMputation
2 “
| hinina NS =m
1 ——" iii
0 5 10 15 20 25
—~ wh
Figure 3-14 Stone stability downstream of a hydraulic jump
Applying the same approach as used for an overflow, we would find from the
continuity equation: K, = wi/uz = hn/h. Compared with the test results, this is much
too high, see Figure 3-14b, while in the overflow situation of Figure 3-13 the similarity
was surprisingly good. The explanation is to be found in the location of the energy
dissipation. In the case of a sill this takes place predominantly at the bottom, in the
hydraulic jump mainly at the surface in the roller of the jump. This appears to be
favourable for the attack on the bed. Using some data concerning turbulence in
hydraulic jumps, Ky according to Equation (3.17) is also represented in Figure 3-14b.
This similarity is quite reasonable.
The tests by Kumin also included determining K,-values for locations further
downstream of the jump, see Figure 3-14c. Computations using the turbulence
decrease expression from Section 2.5.2 together with the divergence in a plane jet (u
1/4) produce the dotted lines in Figure 3-14c. The result is encouraging. The velocity
reduction with the root of the distance appears to be dominant in the process. With d
« 12, this means that the necessary stone diameter will be proportional to the distance
from the outflow. Research for the Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier indicated
approximately the same for the diameter of the stones in the top layer of the bed
protection, which is several hundreds of meters long.
Horizontal constriction
Results of systematic investigations into stability in decelerations behind horizontal
constrictions are not available. Zuurveld, 1998, investigated stone stability in a mixing
layer beyond a sudden widening, sce also Section 2.5. Figure 3-15 a and c show that
incipient motion occurs in the area where the peak velocities are maximal. This is not
the case in the center-line of the mixing layer but in the mainstream. K,, with regard


68 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
to the outflow velocity, = 1. With regard to the average velocity downstream the value
becomes 2, which is in line with a vertical constriction (Figure 3-13).
as —_—
© Zuurveld,1998 oF Ariens, 1993
C)
a = = = = first T
moving
stones <a
Figure 3-15 Peak velocities and incipient motion in horizontal constriction
Ariens, 1993, investigated stone stability behind groynes, see Figure 3-15 b and d.
Here too, the first movement of stones is found in the region with the highest (peak)
velocities. The maximum velocity, (1 + 37) 77, at the threshold of motion was (1 +3 «
0.053)0.72 = 0.83 m/s. In the empty flume, without obstacles, incipient motion was
found at an average velocity of 0.69 m/s and a, vertically averaged, turbulence
intensity, r= 0.077. This leads to a maximum velocity (1 + 37) 7 = 0.85 m/s, so, here
again the peak velocities seem responsible for the movement. The erosion pattern
might give the impression that incipient motion occurs in the mixing layer, but this is
deceitful! Due to the geometry the flow accelerates around the groyne and compared
with the local velocity K, is not much above 1. So, the flow pattern greatly determines
the stability highlighting again the importance of insight into this pattern.
3.4.3 Practical applications
In practice, K,-values are used, based on experiments and applying Equation (3.14).
Ariens, 1993, and Van Breugel/Ten Hove, 1995, have established values which can be
useful for a preliminary design Table 3-1 gives Ky-factors in accordance with the
various definitions of @ which will be clarified hereafter.
From Intermezzo 3-2 we already know that the choice of the velocity used in Equation
(3.14) is important. This is demonstrated here once again. Figure 3-16a shows three
possible definitions for #1: the average velocity upstream ( iz), the average velocity in
the narrowest cross-section, the "gap", (ig) or the maximum velocity near the
structure (7,,). In Table 3-1 the total width and the width of the gap are represented
by bo and bo.
Table 3-1 K,-factors for various types of structures
Groyne Rect- boxKyc/be 13-17 11-12
angular
Trape- boxK bo 12 1
zoidal U


3. FLOW- STABILITY 69
‘Abutment — | Rect- box K/be 13-17 12
angular LJ
CTI
Stream’ boxK be 1-11 1-11
Lined —
Pier Round boxK/bo ® [12-14 ® |I-11
O | ask,
Reet- boxK/bg ® [14-16 ® [12-13
angular LC] | 2*«.
Outflow Abruptly _j 1
a4
Stream’ 0.9
Lined
Sill Section 3.4.1 Section 3.4.1 | Section 3.4.1
Down Figure 3-13 Figure 3-13 | Figure 3-13
Stream _—
® For many piers in a river the first expression for Kv is appropriate. The second is valid for a
detached pier in an infinitely wide flow, where Ke is not defined.
—————————p
= a, @® ® .
Uo —+“e b =o
s ; 2 @
+
Uy =.
| * ty
Figure 3-16 Definition of velocities in relation to Kv
Which one of these three is used depends on the availability of velocity data and on
the nature of the flow situation. Here again: beware of the following pitfalls. For a
horizontal constriction, 7 and jj are related by the continuity equation. When the
horizontal constriction is small, j7 and iy will be almost the same. This is no problem
when we consider the situation in a river or a canal, but in an infinitely wide flow this
wil lead to nonsense. Figure 3-16b shows the situation with a single pier in a sea. The
average velocity upstream and the maximum velocity can be defined, but there is no
"gap".
Concerning Table 3-1, the following remarks can be made:
1. When the maximum velocity can be determined or estimated, the use of Kym is
preferable.
2. In general it can be said that streamlining pays, but the cost-effectiveness has to be
determined for each case separately.
3. In an outflow, there is no extra influence of turbulence. The maximum velocity
inside the aperture determines the stability.
All parameters of the previous sections are now combined with Equation (3.9) into:


70 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
K,? 1?
d= ———_ 3.16
Kae C19
in which K; is the slope correction factor as defined in Section 3.3. Equation (3.16) is
a design formula for practical applications. One could think of combining K, and 7
directly, K, being a load increase factor. But, in that case K, would interfere in the
iteration with the roughness via C, which would result in a too conservative value for
dso. The origin of Ky from Equation (3.14) implies that tests with and without
structures were carried out with the same waterdepths, hence with the same value for
hid. So, first, dsp has to be determined without applying Ky.
Example 3-5
In the narrowest cross-section of a river (depth = 5 m) with a round abutment, the design
velocity is 3.5 m/s. What stone class is necessary in front of the abutment?
First we compute the diameter in uniform flow with u = 3.5 m/s, see Example 3-3. The result
is dnso = 0.128 m. From Table 3-1 we find Ky = 1.3. So, the diameter becomes: dnso =
0.128,1.3? = 0.22 m. From Appendix A we find stone class 10-60 kg.
3.4.4 Amore fundamental approach
In the above sections the effect of turbulence was included in the Shields or Izbash
equation via the correction coefficient Ky. This coefficient was determined from
measurement and curve-fitting through the dataset. This is a correct assumption as long
as the turbulence intensity is a function the geometry of the structure and the mean
velocity 7.
There is a relation between Ky and the relative turbulence intensity r. It can be expected
that the extremes in the velocity field are responsible for incipient motion. These
extremes can be represented by e.g. 7 +30 ~ (1+3r)i, $0, we would expect a relation
between Ky from Equation (3.14) and the turbulence level:
ii, 1+3r,
(1+ 3%¢u ) eu = (14 3% )ifes > Ky = = (3.17)
Wes 14+ 3%ey
in which r;, is the vertically averaged turbulence intensity at some location (see
Intermezzo 3-2) and ry the intensity in uniform flow. The value of 5 and re, can be
determined by measurements in a physical model or can be computed in an appropriate
mathematical model (e.g. a k-e model).
Note: The use of vertically averaged values is a first-order approximation. The
velocity and turbulence profile will influence the attack on the bottom.
In fact in both the formulas of Shields and Izbash the value of rev is included in the
coefficient. One may rewrite the Izbash formula in the following way:


OW STABILITY
2 u.(1+3r))°
Ad=0.7 ue 6, (well 43) (3.18)
22 2¢
Filling in r= 0.075 for normal, uniform flow (this follows from Equation (2.11)) leads
to a value of ci: = 0.47. So, an alternative form of the Izbash formula is
(ue(l+3))°
U, +3r,
Ad=0.47 wel e39) (3.19)
2g
But for example near the reattachment point the velocity near the bed is nearly zero,
while the turbulence is large. A relative turbulence intensity does not work, because
then r becomes infinite. In those cases one should use the k instead, and include the
turbulence effect not as a multiplier but as an addition to the velocity. This means that
the Shields parameter
2
y, = ead ee (35)
strength Agd

should not be written in terms of the shear stress velocity, but in terms of a time-
averaged velocity plus a extra term to account for turbulence effects, for example:

Wo _load_ _ @+avky (3.20)

strength Agd

Although fundamentally correct, this approach has a number of practical problems.
First, one has to determine at what waterdepth the time averaged velocity iz has to be
determined, and the correction factor a needs to be known. The turbulent kinetic
energy can be measured, or can be calculated with a numerical k-¢ model.
The waterdepth
The weak point of the Izbash approach was that the location of the velocity was not
very well defined. Shields solved this problem elegantly by looking to the shear stress
on a normalised bed surface, and not to the force on an individual stone. But this
approach does not allow for an explicit treatment of the turbulence.
As mentioned in Section 2.2 turbulence is an irregular motion, but it also has some
structure. Turbulent structures in the fluid may move up and down, and there is some
memory: a turbulent structure may move for some distance with the flow. Because
turbulent structures may have a size in the same order as the stone of a bed protection,
it may happen that they exert a turning moment on the stone. This is called the
Turbulence Wall Pressure, see Figure 3-17, left. In this way the stone may become
unstable. The velocities indicated in the figure are the deviations from the time average
velocity.


72 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
ee
TS =
EEE ae
= [posassoceeessees =
SSS
eee SEES =
aA Been Ss
p Z eae © RSeties
Zo = SS AG eee
wy Y 22 cr7 Fit t SSS
BA eeAAY QRS
7 CTT SESE E
PEE) Sees
prepept ray yy tye SYP QISIT Ts
aeeereeaaeetaten © eaneeesees
A SSHEEEEN, OO" Ste | cARSSRSSERS
PEERS ieeiiiict
ce RESSEEN S wee eeclosen
alin Vj 2g Seer certs:
SSS — ~\
Figure 3-17 Turbulent wall pressure, left the theory and right the observed relative velocities
(the area right covers 35 x 35 mm) (Hofland, 2005)
Hofland (2005) measured the pressures and pressure distribution on a single stone as
well as velocities near the stone (Figure 3-17, right). The main conclusion from this
research is that turbulent structures come from the main stream and may reach the bed
and cause pressure fluctuations. It is clear that one should not use a time averaged
value at a given depth, but that one should average the sum of velocity and kinetic
energy over a given distance from the bed. So, one should include in the stability
equations some non-local parameters.
Jongeling et al. (2006) developed an equation where the relevant values are averaged
from the bed to a height /in = 5d + 0.2h above the bed (d is stone diameter, h is
waterdepth). The values of 5 and 0.2 followed from curve fitting to measured data:
2
(u +avk )
Py, = Oe im (3.21)
strength Agd
In this equation the symbol (...), is a spatial average over a distance him above the
bed.
Hoan (2008) suggested taking the average over the complete waterdepth, but using a
weight factor so that near bed values contribute more than values near the surface:
2
(Trak, ) JI=z/h
load h
Y Hoan =—— = ——— (3.22)
strength Agd


3. FLOW - STABILITY 73
(zis the distanced above the bed, kv is the kinetic energy of only the turbulent velocity
in the u-direction, {,, = o(u) =u). The tests of Hoan revealed that « should have
a value of 3.0 (for determination of Yw1) or 3.5 (for determination of Priean).
A damage criterion
As explained in Section 3.2.2 the definition of the threshold of movement is not very
well defined. For that reason Paintal developed the transport per m. For low transport
rates this results in parameters with very high (and therefore unreliable) powers.
Therefore Hofland (2005) suggests using the Entrainment Rate:

E
©; = (3.23)
VAgdnso
in which E is the Entrainment (volume of stones moved from the bed per area and per
unit of time, the dimension of E is m*/m?s = m/s). One may consider this as the average
lowering speed of the bed.
In this way one can define a unique relation, curve fitting will determine the required
coefficients in this equation:
Op =f (Vir) =1.16-10 PP iy7? (for: 11 < Py, < 25) (3.24)

Accelerated and decelerated flow
Hoan (2007) measured the entrainment rate as well as the load parameters in a
decelerated flow. As mentioned in Section 3.4.2 deceleration increases the turbulence
significantly.
Figure 3-18 shows that in decelerated flow the Shields formula results in a very large
spread in the results. The formula of Hoan gives much less spread. The disadvantage
of this approach is that the value of the kinetic turbulent energy has to be determined
as function of the height above the bed. This cannot be done with a simple formula.
Numerical modelling, for example with a Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
model is able to provide this information. A practical code to do this is the DEFT-
solver (Segal et al., 2000). Figure 3-19 shows that the calculation of turbulence using
a RANS model results in a quite reliable prediction of the stability number ®. This
figure shows also that the calculation of ¥ using a calculated (or measured) value of
(using Equation 3.22) is still not very reliable.


74 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
aessornl
a 104
wf
: #
w RO 0
my =r Vu-ofu]
os ou eas amy, a E 1 a — Mee
Figure 3-18 Measured entrainment rate as function of the stability parameter of Shields (‘?s,
left) and the stability parameter of Hoan (‘Ptoan, right) (Hoan, 2007)
2 2 3 ’
ae 50%"
20 es a €2 s
Z o mm fF -
FI y i 4 a
15 il a §1 , set
oe oe i
10 15 20 25 o 1 2 3
measured Yu measured , (10°)
Figure 3-19 Calculated and measured values of ®w_ and Me (Hoan, 2007)
A\ll tests and computations were done with permanent accelerated or decelerated flow.
Flow varying in time is not included and it may take some years to be incorporated
this also in this type of solvers. Slowly varying flow (like the tide) can be considered
quasi-permanent, because the time variations are of complete different order than the
time scale of turbulence and the build-up of boundary layers. However, in wind waves
the variation of flow is that fast, that this variation cannot be considered any more as
quasi-permanent. This aspect will be discussed more in detail in Chapters 7 and 8.
A design formula
For a design formula a choice has to be made for an acceptable entrainment rate. A
suggested critical value is Ppt = 10°. This results in values of Wwrerit = 2.9 and
Witounerit = 4.4 The design formulas then become:
(weak) vi=2Th)
dysy = with a=3.0
Ag? Hoan crit


3. FLOW - STABILITY 75
The calculations with the DEFT solver have shown that it is possible to calculate for
permanent (accelerated or decelerated) flow the complete flow field, including the
turbulent energy. The required averaging over the waterdepth is not a problem in such
a model. Unfortunately computational programs like the DEFT solver are not that user-
friendly that they cannot yet be used for everyday design work.
3.5 Coherent material
The word coherent is used here for all materials that show some coherence in contrast
to the loose stones of the previous sections. This contrast is not so black and white. A
placed block that is not connected with, but getting support from its neighbours, forms
the transition between the two categories. For various types of material, some data will
be given. This is based on very few investigations, so this information should be
handled with care.
Gabions
Gabions consist of loose stones, packed together into larger elements, see appendix A.
Gabions can be useful when available stones are not large enough for the flow to be
expected or they may be used because they are easy to place. Due to the pores between
the stones, a gabion has a smaller relative density than solid rock:

1—n) (po Py
A= G=7) (s~ pw) (3.25)
Pw

The porosity, n, usually lies around 40%. Gabions are more stable than a single stone,
as the porosity makes the load of the flow less effective. The coefficient of a single
gabion using the Izbash approach is about 2 times higher than the coefficient of loose
stones, so the final gain in stability coefficient is about 2 x V(1-n) 1.5.
Clay soils
Ven Te Chow, 1959, gives some data on the critical velocity for various clay types
without vegetation. The results can be presented as follows:

Table 3-2 Critical velocity clay
a
PT 20% 0% 0%

Critical velocity (m/s) 15-18 1.0-1.2 0.1-0.4
Vegetation
Chapter 12 gives some information on flow resistance of grass.


76 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Placed blocks
Square or rectangular blocks can be piled up, forming a vertical wall. So, the angle of
repose is 90°, leading to an infinite resistance (tan 90° = 0). Theoretically this is
correct; blocks that are well-placed and interlocked cannot turn and are jammed, see
Figure 3-20a. The only way to lift a block is by pressure from below, or by suction
from above. In practice blocks will not interlock ideally. In Izbash-form, critical values
of w/\(Agd) of 1.5 to 2 times higher than for loose stones were found (Rijkswaterstaat,
1990).
_—— ©) © =
is — ;
Toy rss
filter layer
Placed blocks overlap between mats edge of mat at scour hole
Figure 3-20 Flow situations with coherent materials
Mats
Mats can consist of a geotextile with blocks attached to it or they can be any other
mattress type protection, see Appendix A. The critical velocity for the mat as a whole
is almost infinite. The vulnerable parts are the transitions, e.g the overlap between two
mats or the edge of the protected area in a scour hole, see Figure 3-20b and c. (in
unidirectional flow, these situations do not necessarily occur when the mats are placed
like roof tiles; in tidal flow there is no choice). Due to the curved streamlines, or even
flow separation, there will be a relatively low pressure at the upper side. The result can
be lifting of the mat, making the difference in pressure even greater (part of the
protection standing as a vertical wall in the stream gives a considerable drag). The
magnitude of this lifting force also depends on the permeability of the mat; gabion type
mats can be considered permeable, concrete blocks on a sandtight geotextile
impermeable. With the stability expressed in an Izbash-type of formula, the following
values of we/V(Agd) were found:

Table 3-3 Stability of mats
[reese]
[Matatedye ofscourhole [141
[Loose stones on farbed [7 [|

The reversed flow in a scour hole is the most unfavourable situation, while with a
permeable mattress, at an overlap, the value is still higher than the Izbash value for a
stone on a bed.


FLOWS STABILITY

3.6 Summary

This chapter has treated the stability in flow. The base relation for non-cohesive

material like rock is the Shields relation with correction factors for non-horizontal

beds and flow situations that deviate from uniform flow (Equation (3.16):

a KT
~ Ky AC

The following remarks concerning the use of the parameters in this formula can be

made:

ite the critical, depth-averaged, velocity in uniform flow for incipient motion.

We the threshold-of-motion parameter, indicating the degree of transport near
incipient motion. We = 0.06 can be seen as the start of sediment transport and
can be used in erosion computations. For bed protections, where only minor
losses of material are acceptable, a lower value, e.g. ye = 0.03 is
recommended.

Cc the Chezy-coefficient, indicating the roughness. ky = 2dyso.can serve as a first
estimate of the equivalent roughness (together with y. = 0.03, see Section
3.2.5.

K is a strength-reduction parameter for stones on a slope, see Equations (3.10)
and (3.11).

Ky the velocity/turbulence factor, indicating a load deviating from uniform flow.
For various flow situations, Table 3-1 gives values for K,. This factor should
be applied as a correction after the diameter in uniform flow has been
determined. Otherwise Ky will influence the iteration of d and C (which also
contains d via k).

In accelerating flow, K, = 1 can always be used, provided the local velocity is
used in the equation.

Finally, some information on stability of coherent material like mats, gabions and clay

is presented.




4 FLOW - Erosion

aS

ae i e

Aa

f= p> ages

sa “ “7 Ere ag

(OE TOME i srectt a A
Of Ee ne
ee ica x | eta

Scour in a horizontal constriction (photo Deltares)


80 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
4.1 Introduction
Before even thinking of protection works, one should have an idea of the possible
erosion. Erosion (and sedimentation) occurs everywhere in nature where the bed
consists of fine sediments. This book does not cover morphological processes; it is
limited to local scour in the vicinity of structures. This scour may be caused by the
structure itself, like a bridge pier in a river, or it may be the result of a natural process
which the structure is meant to prevent or limit, like a protected bank in a meandering
river. It must be stressed that awareness and knowledge of morphological processes is
very important for engineering in natural systems. Bridges have been built across
rivers that have later chosen another path, leaving the bridge as a monument to lousy
engineering.
4.1.1 Scour as sediment transport
Scour is a special case of sediment transport and occurs when the local transport
exceeds the supply from upstream. The difference in transport can be due to a
difference either in velocity or in turbulence or both. The general expression for the
conservation of mass for sediment reads:
az , Os
op, OP 9 (4.1)
et Ox
in which zp is the position of the bed and S the total sediment transport per unit width.
Three possible situations for local scour are, see Figure 4-1:
1 ¢] 1 1 [ 2]
at
— 0
Se Sie | ' '
! 1 ! cr ' 1
oo | : |
® ©
Figure 4-1 General picture local erosion
a) S2=S,> 0. This is a dynamic equilibrium situation. Sediment can be picked up
and can settle again, but there is no net change of the position of the bed.
b) S2>S1=0. There is no sediment supply from upstream, while there is sediment
transport downstream. This case is known as clear-water scour.
c) S2>S1> 0. There is sediment supply from upstream but the sediment transport
downstream is larger. This case is known as live-bed scour.
Clear-water scour (case b) can result either from a lack of transport capacity or from
a lack of erodable material upstream. Figure 4-1b shows an example of the first case,
in which cross-section | is in a lake, upstream from a dam, and cross-section 2 is


4. FLOW- EROSION 81
downstream of an outlet structure. The flow in 1 is too weak to transport material. As
shown in Figure 4-Ic it is also possible that the velocity in cross-section | is below the
critical value, while the disturbance due to the pier causes transport in 2. A bed
protection of infinite length upstream is an example of the second case. In cross-section
1 the transport capacity is equal to the transport capacity in 2, but the transport in 1
is 0, because the flow cannot pick up sediment. So, an infinitely long bed protection
does not prevent scour. Clear-water scour stops when a depth is reached such that the
velocity drops below the critical value.

In live-bed scour (case c) the upstream flow in Figure 4-lc is strong enough to
transport sediment but the structure causes accelerations and decelerations with
turbulence, leading to an increase of the transport capacity. The scour stops when the
eroding capacity in 2 equals the supply from 1. The eroded sediment will settle
downstream from cross-section 2, so on a larger scale case c can be a part of case a.
Sediment transport is a function of velocity and sediment properties and is often
presented as (see also chapter 1 and 3 on mobility and stability parameters):

S=fU-Ye) o S=fW) (4.2)
The first type of expression includes a threshold of motion. An example is the well-
known formula by Meyer-Peter-Miiller, The second type neglects y.. Examples are
Engelund-Hansen and Paintal. In cases where y>> ye, suspended sediment load plays
an important role in scouring. In uniform and stationary conditions, there is a dynamic
equilibrium in the vertical direction (for more detail, see e.g. Graf, 1971):

W, E +0, oe =0 (4.3)

Oz

ws is the fall velocity of the sediment, c the time-averaged concentration and v, the
turbulent diffusivity. The first term in Equation (4.3) stands for the settling of the
sediment and the second term represents the stirring up. ws depends on the sediment,
v, depends on the flow situation and is related to the turbulence in the flow.
It can be expected that scouring and high turbulence intensity are somehow correlated.
Figure 4-2 shows the scour in one of the channels of the Eastern Scheldt storm surge
barrier during construction (from Delft Hydraulics, 1988). The flow in the channel
separates twice: around the left abutment of the channel and around the (temporary)
edge of the placed concrete beams. The turbulence in the mixing layers acts as a
whirlwind and results in a relatively deep scour hole.
In Chapter 3 we saw that the location with the heaviest attack on the bed is not
necessarily found at the mixing layer. In scouring this is possibly different. When
suspension becomes important, Equation (4.3) indicates that turbulence also becomes
important. Moreover, Zuurveld, 1998, and Booij, 1998, found that the ratio between


82 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
the size of a grain and a vortex determines the stability. In a horizontal expansion when
yw Ye, the vortices in the mainflow induce larger forces on the grains than those in
the mixing layer. When y>> y,, this picture can change completely.
1000
@ as Ce Wee ® abutments and foundation re. ©
a proacke a 4 és
‘land | i 2
2b 20
placed concrete beams
plan view tidal channel cross sections 1 and 2 pepeabia tanto
Figure 4-2 Example of scour during construction of Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier
Being a special case of sediment transport, it seems logical to describe scour with
formulas like Equation (4.2) with an additional factor for turbulence, as found in
stability relations. However, practically all scour relations are empirical expressions
for the scour depth. In the following sections some of those expressions will be
presented for different cases.
4.1.2 The scour process
Figure 4-3a shows some characteristics of scour. Initially, the bed is still flat, the
velocity profile is not yet influenced by the scour hole and the flow is still nearly
uniform. Sediment is then suspended in the water, see Equation (4.3), and is carried
along with the main flow. The upstream slope is formed, fincreases and then becomes
constant.
.
u = 2 ne -
ho z
= =< tnixing layer K equilibrium
a S = develop-
Da | x S
+ sS “ ment
ot
4 meBeaeey 2 1 equilibrium scour depth
) x © mh aed
1 Sr as bed Scqi
1
_-Clear-watter scour ‘Clear-water scour
natyo © 1 2 Upfuc ——— time
Figure 4-3 General definition scour hole and development in time
Because of this slope, the flow separates, causing a mixing layer in the scour hole and
a recirculation zone in which water flows against the main flow direction. This also
indicates that the scouring process is influenced by the scour hole itself, which a
complication is compared with the stability phenomena discussed in Chapter 3 ("scour
causes scour"). Sediment is picked up from the lower parts of the slope, the velocity
in the scour hole reaches values close to the critical value and the process slows down.


4, FLOW - EROSION 83
Material is no longer moved from the upstream slope. The final scour depth is reached
asymptotically.
For practical purposes, the development and the equilibrium depth are important.
When the erosion process is fast, only the equilibrium depth is of interest. When the
process is slower, the development in time can also become important. The importance
of the development in time is reflected in the maintenance policy, which can be to
cover the scour hole when the depth becomes dangerously high. Another situation in
which the development in time is important, is the development of scour during
construction; different construction phases give different scour intensities.
Figure 4-3b shows the equilibrium depth (made dimensionless by dividing by the pier
diameter) with increasing velocity. When fo < uc, scour already occurs due to the above
mentioned aggravation of the load around the pier, starting at ig ~ 0.51. (clear-water
scour). The scour reaches a maximum when fip ~ tc, at the transition between clear-
water scour and live-bed scour. The empirical scour formulas described in this chapter
predict this maximum. In most common cases, i.e. for normal flow conditions and a
sandy bed, live-bed scour occurs and this maximum can be used as a reasonable
prediction of the scour depth. In the case of clear-water scour, as may occur for either
low flow velocities or relatively coarse bed material such as gravel, the reduction in
scour depth must be taken into account. This can be done by assuming a linear
reduction between iio / we = 1 and tip / ue = 0.5 (dotted line in Figure 4-3b).
When iio> uc the scour depth can decrease again slightly, because then the whole bed
moves (live-bed scour). A second peak can occur at the transition between
ripples/dunes and anti-dunes where the bed is flat. In that case, the flow does not need
to spend energy to overcome the form drag of the dunes and can devote itself
completely to sediment transport
Figure 4-3c shows the different development of clear-water and live-bed scour. Live-
bed scour reaches equilibrium much faster than clear-water scour. Moreover, the depth
of the scour hole fluctuates due to the migration of ripples and dunes on the bed.
Usually, the scour process is so fast that only the equilibrium depth is of interest in
hydraulic engineering.
In general the development in time can be expressed as an exponential function (see
Figure 4-3):

i t
bs 1 9 TF (4.4)
Te

in which Tis the time scale for the process. This time scale can be made dimensionless
as:


84 __CINTRODUCTIONTOBED, BANKANDSHOREPROTECTION
«_ VgAds
7’ =N8S450 7 (4.5)
Dp
in which dso is the nominal diameter of the bed material and D is the characteristic
length scale of the scour-inducing structure, e.g. the pile diameter. The value of 7” is
a function of the load (y) and the type of structure.
4.2 Scour without protection
Protection against erosion is not always necessary, as scour as such is not the problem.
Only if the stability of a structure is endangered, a protective apron will be needed.
Insight into the degree of scour without protection is important to the designer, in order
to be able to decide whether measures are to be taken. Scour without protection usually
develops quickly, so only the equilibrium depth (Iie, See Figure 4-3) is of interest to
the designer.
4.2.1 Scour in jets and culverts
There are many types of jets, circular and plane, horizontal and vertical, plunging and
submerged, see Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991. Here, the focus is on submerged, horizontal
jets, see Figure 4-4a. The difference between a (circular) jet and a culvert is the
waterdepth downstream (the tailwater depth). When the tailwater depth is smaller than
the diameter D, it is called a culvert although it is not crystal clear where the transition
between a jet and a culvert lies.
@® ® 100)
= yg Le
é DE on], yg let Al |
C. _— wo + _ ea | |
ri u ‘ Loa to
A aT
D: diameter circular jet ier 1 TI
B: width plane jet 10 100 1000
——_ uu,
Figure 4-4 Scour in horizontal jets and culverts
For scour in horizontal jets, the approach by Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991, is adopted.
Experimental results suggest that the length-depth ratio of a jet scour hole, Ls/hs see
Figure 4-4a, is constant (~ 5 - 7). Assuming that Ls is determined by the location where
the jet’s um (see Chapter 2) is equal to the critical velocity of the bed material, we find
(applying the jet velocity relations of Chapter 2):


4. FLOW - EROSION 85
Duy Duy D Io
Circular jets! ug = ty ¢ 8 oe M0 oe HMO, Be WO MO
x Lh Do tie Ue
2
. B B Iie
Plane jets: up =U NB, wo VB > |
Ve he Ba

(4.6)
ur is used instead of uw, being an unambiguously defined critical velocity when the
waterdepth is not clearly defined. These proportionalities, combined with experimental
results, finally lead to, see also Figure 4-4b:

h " h
plane jet: 2 =0.008} “| circular jet: =0.08 “0 (4.7)
2B Une D Ure

The scour with a plane jet is much higher than with a circular jet, due to the horizontal
divergence of the flow in a circular jet. For circular jets, the width of the scour hole is
approximately half its length.
Experiments with culverts have given much smaller scouring depths than with circular
jets. For culverts Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991, present the scour depth as (see also Figure
4-4b):

h 0.33

ee = 0,65] 40 (4.8)

D Use

An explanation can possibly be found in the energy loss. To reach the same outflow
velocity, wo, one expects the necessary head difference for a jet to be greater than for a
culvert, due to the "drowning" of the flow in the large tailwater depth. The loss of
energy (or better the conversion from potential energy into kinetic energy and hence
turbulence) is equal to pg(/—ha)Q, so with equal uw, hence equal Q, the amount of
turbulent energy is larger for a jet, resulting in more scour. Another simple way of
looking at this difference is that a greater discharge (s i7/o) is able to transport more
sediment. As said before, the transition between jets and culverts will not be so clear
with varying tailwater depths, so Equations (4.7) and (4.8) only serve as a first
indication.
4.2.2 Scour around detached bodies
Piers are the most common examples of detached bodies and are important in many
fields of hydraulic engineering. Figure 4-5a shows a clear picture (from
Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991) of the flow around a cylinder. In chapter 2 we already saw
that there is a downflow in front of the cylinder, which acts more or less as a vertical


86 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
jet, due to the difference in pressure, which is in turn caused by the vertical difference
in horizontal velocity. This jet, together with the accelerated flow at the sides of the
pier (with max © 2iio), initiates erosion. Once an erosion hole has appeared, the same
circulating current as found in the scour hole in Figure 4-3 appears. This eddy is carried
along with the flow, leading to a horseshoe-shaped vortex. This vortex, together with
the accelerated flow and wake vortices, transports the sediment further downstream.
Behind the pier, the transport capacity decreases again and a bar is formed.
surface i 7
roller =
AT omyem P wake vortex
— —2 en tee
~ downflow. WEE
flow, i LBP), |= Wey
ee ab a eH Scour hole
SS OCOD
sediment -. : i= COS >. horseshoe
bed oaee nr’ vortex
Figure 4-5 Scour around a cylinder (from Breusers / Raudkivi, 1991)
The complex three-dimensional flow pattern around a pier rules out an analytical
approach for scour depths; only experimental results are available. For slender piers
(waterdepth/diameter ratio > 2-3), the scour depth is found to be proportional to the
pier diameter with a constant of proportionality ~ 1.5-2, see Breusers et al., 1977. The
increase of velocity around the pier is not a function of the diameter (potential flow
gives doubling of the approach velocity for any diameter), but this proportionality can
possibly be explained by the downflow in front of the pier and the vortices in the wake.
The downflow is expected to increase when a broader object halts the flow, the vortices
behind the pier grow as the wake behind the cylinder widens. It can be expected that
this growth cannot go on when the diameter of the pier approaches or exceeds the
waterdepth. The downflow will be limited when the pier acts as a complete "wall" and
the size of the vortices will be limited by the waterdepth. Think of a "pier" with a
diameter of 100 m in a waterdepth of 10 m (e.g. an offshore oil storage device) or,
even larger, an island. A direct relation between scour depth and diameter does not
seem logical with such large diameters; the flow process around one edge of the
structure will hardly be related to what happens around the other edge. A relation with
the waterdepth seems more appropriate, which has also been found in experiments.


4. FLOW - EROSION 87
Oy aaa
£06 -}-}-4 | 1s ae
h/D= 0.0
a \ UN ps ee
Peers Zama
- os 7
"Fahl |
Figure 4-6 Scour around cylinder as function of waterdepth and diameter
Figure 4-6 shows the range of experimental results as given by Breusers et al, 1977. A
mathematical description of the whole range of situations sketched above can be given
by means of a hyperbolic tangent of the dimensionless parameters /s/D and ho/D. For
large values of /o/D (slender piles in deep water), tanh(/io/D) becomes 1, giving hy
D. For small values of ho/D (large bodies in shallow water), tanh(/io/D) becomes I/D,
giving hy ho. A constant of proportionality of 2 is recommended by Breusers et al,
1977, for design purposes. As can be seen from Figure 4-6 this is a conservative upper
boundary. Sumer and Fredsoe (2002) report the mean and standard deviation of this
parameter as 1.3 and 0.7, respectively. These values can be used in probabilistic
design.
Note: The tanh-function has no physical basis. It is just a function with convenient
mathematical properties to describe the above-mentioned relations.
Figure 4-6 is valid for cylindrical piers. For other shapes, Table 4.1 gives values of a
shape factor. Streamlining is favourable against scour, but when the flow direction
deviates from the main axis of the pier, the effect can become negative, see Figure 4-7.
For a first design the following encapsulating formula is proposed:
bs aK, K, K, tan (4) (4.9)
D D

in which:
Ks = shape factor, see Table 4.1
Ka= angle of attack factor, see Figure 4-7
K, = velocity factor, see Figure 4-3b: Ky = 0 for u/ue <0.5, Ky = 1 for u/ue > 1 and Ky =
(2u/ue ~ 1) for 0.5 <ulue <1


88 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Table 4.1 Shape factors for various pier
shapes
: [Fiershape [vb [Ks |
Melipee reste: wee Cylinder - 1.0
A cr
angle of etock |
E r Rectangular | 1 12
BO i 3 Ll
+
ee BAY 5 10
| y Elliptic 2 0.85
3 os
a 5 0.6
Figure 4-7 Multiplying factor for piers not
aligned with flow
Note:
© floating debris or ice can enlarge the effective width of a pier or pile
© fora bridge with many piers, extra scour may occur due to the flow constriction
© wave action around the pier will hardly increase the scour depth (max. — 10%)
Finally, the dimensionless time scale of the scouring process (for live-bed scour) for
cylindrical piers is given by Sumer and Fredsge (2002):
. 1h, >
T=—_ty (4.10)
2000 D
This expression can be used in combination with Equation (4.5) to calculate the time
scale. Scour around cylindrical piers usually develops quite quickly, the time scale is
commonly in the order of magnitude of a few hours.
Example 4-1
A cylindrical pier with a diameter of 5 m is located in a river, 5 m deep, with a gravel bed,
dso = 5 mm. The flow velocity is 1 m/s. What is the expected scour depth?
The dimensionless diameter, d*, in the Shields-Van Rijn graph, see Figure 3.2b, is:
0.005 x ((1.65%9.81)/(1.33x 10°)" = 105. This gives ye = 0.05 (Note: scour refers to
sediment transport, not to damage to a bed protection, so, the original Shields values should
be used). With an assumed roughness of twice the median grain diameter we find C = 18
log(12 x 5/0.01) = 68 \m/s. From this we find a critical velocity: uc = 68x W(1.65x 0.005x
0.05) = 1.38 m/s. The velocity coefficient in Equation (4.9) then becomes: 2x 1/1.38-1=0.45.
The scour depth becomes: 2 x 5 x 0.45 x tanh(5/5) = 3.4 m. (The mean value is 2.2 m with
standard deviation of 1.2 m).
Example 4-2
The same pier is now located in a sand bed with dso = 300 microns. What is now the
equilibrium scour depth and how quickly does this scour hole develop?


4, FLOW - EROSION 89
For this sand we find d* = 300x 10°x ((1.65x 9.81)/(1.33x 10°)2)" = 6.3; ye = 0.04; C=
90 \mis and the critical velocity: uc = 0.39 m/s. So now we have live-bed conditions (U >
U;) and the equilibrium scour depth becomes: 2x 5x tanh(5/5) = 7.6 m.
To calculate the time scale we need to work out the actual load on the bed. With u = 1 m/s
and C = 90 \m/s we find a bed shear stress of r = 1000x 9.81/90% 1? = 1.2 Pa and thus y
= 1.2/(1000x 9.81 x 1.65 x 300 x 10°) = 0.26. This gives T* = 1/2000x (5/5)x 0.262? = 0.010.
Using equation (4.10) we find the time scale T = 12140 s = 3.3 hours. Given the exponential
time-dependency (equation 4.4), 50% of the scour depth is reached in —In(1-0.5)x T =
0.7xT = 2.3 hours and 95% in -In(1-0.95)« T= 3xT= 10 hours.
4.2.3 Scour around attached bodies and in constrictions
Scour around constrictions will be treated by considering various elements: abutments,
gradual constrictions and combinations as is the case with groynes.
Abutments
The first approach to abutment scour is simply to consider the abutment as a half pier.
Figure 4-8 shows the relation between the scour depth, the abutment width (D, the
protrusion into the water) and the waterdepth. This is the same pattern as can be seen
in Figure 4-6, although D is now half the diameter, since the wall can be seen as the
central axis of a pier. This makes abutment scour less than pier scour which is possibly
because the wall suppresses the downflow and the vortices behind the structure.
Streamlining is now relevant, because the angle of attack is less important. Note that
the width of the flow is implicitly assumed infinite; narrowing of the flow width by
the abutment does not play a role in these experiments.
| eee) fe
15 a
hJD = 1.5 tanh (h/D)| | Dd
ee Za
4 Za
Fe
4
0 “Streamlined”
0 1 2 ui —
Figure 4-8 Scour around abutments (adapted from Breusers / Raudkivi, 1991)
Table 4.2 Shape factors for abutments
Rectangular ("Blunt") 1.0
Cylindrical 0.75 - 1.0


90 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Figure 4-9 shows the flow pattern and the erosion after the construction of the first
Zeebrugge breakwater, which can be seen as an enormous abutment (D . 1500m). The
velocity has increased with a factor, a little less than 2, which is in line with what could
be expected according to potential flow. The scour depth is about 17.5-7 = 10 m, about
1.5 times the waterdepth, which is in accordance with Equation (4.9) and Table 4.2.
So, for a first approach, these equations are useful, despite the physical shortcomings.
SNe ry Coral
1a 120 a6 CH Roweryz Gg
188 1.865 a awe ) Sees 4s
10 SS - Dae (lest /
A ees ae an
15K & g Sy ee Wr s----
; SS ?
~~ Before construction After construction
Velocities in m/s Depth contours in MSL -m
Figure 4-9 Flow velocities and scour around breakwater Zeebrugge
Gradual constrictions
Narrowing a river stretch leads to general deepening of the bed. The depth inside the
constriction can be calculated using continuity equations for water and sediment. Both
the discharge, Q, and the sediment transport, S, (see Figure 4-10) remain constant in
the equilibrium stage.
Q
— 2 —- hy
= c
—s
Figure 4-10 Erosion in gradual constriction
Assuming a simple relation between sediment transport and velocity: S= k.u", we find:
Bl m-l
O=Bymh=Bywyhy SP uy=my— | prt pm yg, B\Yn
By 5, Bl FL
Be m B
S=B, kul” = By kul! In
(4.11)
musually lies between 4 and 5, so the power in Equation (4.11) lies between 0.75 and
0.8.
Groynes
Groynes can be seen as blunt abutments, but the narrowing of the river bed also plays
a role. The constricted river width therefore appears in the relation for scour depth.
Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991, recommend as a first approximation for a vertical groyne
perpendicular in a straight channel. (see Figure 4-11):
fa) 2/3
Iy + Ngo =2.2 (4) (4.12)


4. FLOW - EROSION 91
Note that the constant 2.2 in this equation is not dimensionless!
® A ®© "| abutment + constriction #
pee = i
— i =
= e 8 a
= h, (m) =
LJ 6 SR abutment (eq. 4.9)
"A -7 groyne (eq. 412) rg =700 mi
4 u=2mis
reac, = | 2 eaeeenl bg= Gm E
hy 0 zat
i) 25) (m) 5
Figure 4-11 Scour around groyne
When the head of the groyne is not vertical, the separation of the flow behind the
groyne does not take place in one vertical plane, which has a favourable influence on
the erosion. With a slope of 45°, the depth is about 15% less. With very gentle sloping
heads, reductions of 50% seem possible. When the groynes are situated at the concave
side in a river bend, the depth can increase 10 - 50%, depending on the bend radius.
For more detail, see Breusers/Raudkivi, 1991.
Figure 4-11 also shows a comparison of Equation (4.12) with Equations (4.9) (applied
to abutments) and (4.11). Abutment and constriction scour are simply added together.
The similarity for this case is rather good, but for other river widths or water depths,
the results can deviate considerably. The comparison is only presented here to show
that there are “family ties” between the empirical relations and that it should be
possible in the future to replace them by one approach, dealing with the whole
phenomenon.
4.3 Scour with bed protection
A bed protection around a bridge pier can be made to cover the whole area of increased
load leading to almost negligible scour. With protection downstream of a jet or a
culvert, the additional load vanishes slowly and the main effects are that the flow
becomes calmer and the scour development moderates. Many investigations on this
subject were carried out for the design of closure dams in the framework of the
Deltaproject in the Netherlands. Development in time was an important factor there,
as equilibrium depths for every building stage were never reached, thanks to the
progress of the closure. But in other situations it can also be good to know the scour
as a function of time (the development phase in Figure 4-3). It can play an important
role in maintenance policies, as relatively little is known about the slopes of scouring
holes and the soil-mechanical stability. It is therefore important not to be taken by
surprise by unforeseen rapid developments.


92 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

4.3.1 Scour development in time

The research for the Deltaproject aimed mainly at establishing reliable scale relations

to interpret model results, see the comparison in Intermezzo 4-1. The derived relations,

however, can also be used for prediction purposes in a preliminary design. Several
hundreds of tests have been performed and the experimentally established relations
have gained some general validity. From a dimensional analysis and many
experiments, the following expression was finally developed for clear-water scour
behind a bed protection:
— = \l7 02
ny = we) ho? a4 ary

10A

in which h(t) is the maximum depth in the scour hole as a function of time, while /o

is the original waterdepth; @ is the vertically averaged velocity at the end of the

protection. ¢ is the time in hours in this empirical relation. The constant 10 is not
dimensionless. a represents, among other things, turbulence and increases the effective
velocity. This is the "dust-bin" in the scouring formula.

From Equation (4.13) we see that:

the scour depth grows in time with a power 0.4

«there is some influence of the specific weight of the sediment (power 0.7) and very

little of the waterdepth (power 0.2)
«the difference between the actual velocity multiplied by @ and the critical velocity
is dominant, due to the power 1.7

Note 1 Equation (4.13) is valid for the development phase of the scouring
process; @ii—ii. should therefore not be too small (> 0.1 m/s).

Note 2 The power 0.4 for time in Equation (4.13) is strictly speaking for 2-
dimensional flow situations. For 3-dimensional flow (horizontal
constriction, outflow from a discharge sluice etc.) the power should be
higher in the beginning and slightly smaller later on. As a first
approximation 0.4 will be used for all time dependent scour.

4.3.2 Factor a

For preliminary design purposes, it is necessary to have some insight into the relation

between geometry and a. @is an amplification factor for the velocity, which expresses

the disturbance in the flow, hence it is expected to be related to the turbulent
fluctuations in the flow. But, similar to the velocity factor Ky in the stability relations
for stones, see chapter 3, much depends on where and how the velocity is defined, see

also Jorissen/Vrijling, 1989.


4, FLOW- EROSION 93
| it A-A
- i) -
A A + Vie | ; D hy
' aU =a%.u (a)
aS rs Tie
“| 2 B-B
B-HtE-B. [= pn
5
~—e os OHS
“TT 79:3 ye
' 5 5 1 |
pete) Vee be)
o 08 10 0 08 10 0
—> diy —> dh, om)
Figure 4-12 Influence of definition of «. on numerical values
Figure 4-12a shows two ways to define @ and @ in Equation (4.13). When ais defined
as Q/A, the influence of a locally increased velocity must be included in a, thus
"polluting" this coefficient with the velocity distribution. When 7 is defined locally, a
only represents the amplification factor due to turbulence. The product a iis of course
the same in both cases.
For i = Q/A, Figure 4-12b shows @ as a function of the vertical constriction for 2-
dimensional and 3-dimensional scouring (without and with horizontal constriction
respectively). This data has resulted from systematic scour investigations for the
Deltaproject. The a’s differ considerably, largely due to the velocity distributions.
Using the local velocity, Figure 4-12c gives the relation between a and the vertical
constriction. The difference is much less, as the velocity distribution does not influence
a. It is to be expected, therefore, that a correlation between @ and the turbulence of the
flow will only be found when w, and q@ are used. Figure 4-12d shows the relation
between az and the turbulent fluctuations, expressed as r (depth-averaged), which
reads:
a =1.5+ Sr for a, >1.8 (4.14)
So indeed, a relation between a and r exists, indicating that turbulence together with
a local velocity, accounts for time-dependent scour.


94 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 4-1 Comparison model test and prototype
Equation (4.13) has been based on modeltests related a Comparisons of prototype data
for the Deltaproject. « represents turbulence were very difficult due to the ever-changing
in the flow and is related to the geometry of | situation during the construction of the Delta-
the flow situation. It is often derived from a dams. To increase confidence, a special test
scale model in which J, ©, ue and A are was performed using a real outlet sluice and
known and in which fy is measured as a_ its scale model, both equipped with an extra
function of time. @ can then be calculated disturbing dam for extra scour. Figure 4-13
from Equation (4.13). With this « Equation shows the result: conformity in development
(4.13) is used again to calculate the scour in is reasonable. The resemblance between the
prototype circumstances. The scale model is Scour holes in the model and in reality was
only used to obtain the geometry good.
<= dam ‘ hy = 11m
+—— 440m —+
= T | fe m
ee | rit]
10
ah =.
3 a __ sat fT
_e Ft tty
4 een
| | pret | oT TT
aL LHe rt sxtemove TTT |
20 40 60 100 200 400 1000
———_ net scour time (hr)

Figure 4-13 Comparison model-prototype scour development (De Grauw/Pilarczyk, 1981)
For a preliminary design, Figure 4-14 gives values for @ based on local velocities in
situations with vertical and horizontal constrictions. For a project of some importance,
experiments using a scale model will be necessary. In the case of an outlet structure
that discharges into a large body of water, there are no clear vertical and/or horizontal
constriction dimensions. In that case the scour can be approximated to the a-value for
a vertical vortex-street which lies around 4 for a bed protection that is 10 /o long.

eo <r ©] = s

4
al a‘
|? |:
0
i) 05 —— 1.0 Dh, ary 05 —— 1.0 b/B
Figure 4-14 Values for ou. as a function of vertical and horizontal constriction for L/ho =10


4, FLOW- EROSION 95
4.3.3 Protection length and roughness
It is to be expected that a longer bed protection will lead to lower a-values, due to
dissipation of turbulence, see Chapter 2. Figure 4.15 shows the influence of the length
of the bed protection on a, based on the results of systematic scour research.
6 :
a — from experiments
5] ~ ——. from turbulence
‘ computations
4 =<
3 experiments 7S ~~ __|
with various’ = —S
2| configurations | =
—
|
i} 10 20 30 40
—> Lh
Figure 4-15 Relation between a., turbulence and length of bed protection
For L/ho > 5 this influence can be described using the following relation:

QL hy) =1.5 + (1.57 aq —2.35) ¢ 085 Hilo) (4.15)
where ajo is the a-value for L/ho = 10. Note that omin ~ 1.5 for an infinitely long bed
protection. So, indeed, as said in Section 4.1.1, such a protection does not prevent
scour!

The roughness of the bed protection is also of influence. Surprisingly, with a smooth
protection, the velocities near the bed are high and cause more scour. Probably more
turbulence is created in the mixing layer in the scour hole. The influence of the
roughness on @is given by Hoffmans/Booij, 1993:

. -_C .

@a1S45n f, with f= (f, =1 for C<40 Vm/s) (4.16)
Smooth (e.g. asphalt) bed-protections lead to 20-30% higher a-values than rough
protections. Very rough protections induce extra turbulence, compensating the effect
of a lower bed velocity, hence the minimum value for f: = 1.

In Figure 4.15, a comparison is also made between the experimental results (Equation
(4.15) and the influence of a rough bed protection (C = 40 “"/,). The comparison is
made for equal a-values at L/ho = 10. As can be seen the correspondence is quite good,
for short protections, while for long protections, the empirical results give no clue as
no data are available. The minimum q-value in Equation (4.16) is 2 with C= 40 “"/,


96 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
(r= 1.2 Vg/C, see Chapter 2), while the experiments produced a minimum value for a
= 1.5. Here again, the experimental data do not prove which value is correct.
4.3.4 Varying conditions
For scour in a tidal flow with, Equation (4.13) can be used, with the tide taken into
account as a succession of stationary flow situations, replacing (ai — ii)" for each
flow direction by:
It 1.7
pi(an—m) dt (4.17)
0
in which 7 is the tidal period. In the case of e.g. an outlet sluice which discharges into
the sea during low water, this works only part of the tidal period. The scour at one side
ofa structure should then be computed using only the flow in one direction, see Figure
4-16a.
me ooney \
® (cU-a) © = MER RERRE A oeetod
7 \ © ao I here
a S i [max (end) aster fa)
(J Na 10) eet ert
lc 6 Soe tH
“ yg a Soe ae
a eo ee
ui d | 2 Zan ee
waterlevel beri [TT TTT
sea-side 1 10 100 1000
—  t(days)
Figure 4-16 Scour in tidal flow and during constriction
When scour has to be determined for the construction period of a structure, Figure
4-16b shows the procedure. For various representative building stages, each one
lasting Ar, the various scour-time curves need to be determined. The first curve is
followed during An. At the end of this period the line continues horizontally to the
second curve (the scour hole according to the second curve starts with the end value
of the first period) and so on till the end. This procedure can be used as the similarity
of the shapes of scour holes is an important finding of the systematic scour research.
4.3.5 Equilibrium scour
Clear-water scour
A simple approach to find the equilibrium depth in the case of clear-water scour with
bed protection is to say that the equilibrium depth is reached when the velocity in the
hole, multiplied by @ equals ue. This will overestimate the equilibrium depth, because
ais defined at the edge of the protection and not in the hole itself. A reduction of au
with a factor of about 0.5 seems reasonable.


4. FLOW - EROSION o7
Oa fs ae
— au, é aa
hy \ Sees Oe ie
—— Ui (m/s)
Figure 4-17 Equilibrium scour compared with equations for jets and culverts
With the continuity equation this leads to, see Figure 4-17a:
Ue = 0.5 ai, joe _ 05 aii, (4.18)
ii, (I + Ie) =i Ing hy i
Figure 4-17b shows the equilibrium depth computed with Equation (4.18) compared
with the depth in circular jets and culverts computed with Equations (4.7) and (4.8)
respectively. The comparison is only qualitative again to show the family ties between
empirical relations. a = 5 for a situation with a protection length of 0, very roughly
estimated from Figure 4.15 (starting from @=4 for L = 10ho). ho is 1, 2 and 4 m. The
results show an increase in scour depth with increasing tailwater depth, which is the
same trend shown by the jet and culvert relations, see Section 4.2.1. The jet formula
seems appropriate when the waterdepth equals or exceeds the outflow diameter.
Example 4-3

At the outflow of a culvert an apron serves as bed protection. At the end of the protection

the waterdepth is 3 m, the velocity is 1.2 m/s and the bed consists of sand with dso = 0.3

mm. The coefficient a = 2.5 is used as an example in this situation. What is the scour depth

after 10 days of effective use?

From Chapter 3 we find uc = 0.4 (see also Example 4-1) Equation 4.10 gives: hs = (2.5x1.2

=0.4)!7x3°2)x(24%10)°4/(10x1.65°”) = 4 m. This means that there seems no real danger of

collapse at the edge of the apron within a short period of coming into use. The final depth

(without supply of sediment) is derived from Equation (4.15): Neo = (0.5x2.5x1.2 — 0.4)x3/0.4

= 8.3 m. So, within the first 10 days of use, the scour reaches almost half the final depth.
Live-bed scour
In the case of live-bed scour with bed protection, the equilibrium depth will be reached
when the sediment outflow from the hole becomes equal to the sediment supply from
upstream, see Section 4.1. This depth will be smaller than follows from Equation
(4.18), which has been developed for clear-water scour. The scouring formula,
Equation (4.13), represents the clear-water scour and the sediment supply turns it into
a formula for live-bed scour. Using Equation (4.13) and representing the hole as a
triangle, see Figure 4-18a, the volume of the hole per m width, without sediment
supply, is:


98 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
1 2
I= = (cot fi + cot fy) hy
2 (4.19)
-[ 005 (cot fy + cot fy) A“ AO4 (ait -z, yeyes =K 18
where K is short for the expression between brackets.
=
@ ®t {[ [|  [avasol— |
as el =
—e5 _—— ee
—_— Ss _ oat
he “eee oud
“ EE 08
1 a
1 10 700 7000 70000
—— t (days)
Figure 4-18 Scour reduction by sediment supply
With sediment supply this becomes:
Teg =K 08-8: > Iyrea =, ——48 —_ (4.20)
0.5-(cot £, + cot fy)
An equilibrium is reached when, see Figure 4-18:
5 0.8
dl 2 0.8K KS —s-t,
<< =0508K 1°? -5-+1,-( 84) She = |g
at s 3 (cot A + cot po)
(4.21)
There are, however, many uncertainties in this procedure: cot /i,2 have to be estimated
(c.g, 4 and 40), Shas to be calculated and te is very sensitive to variations of K and S.
Therefore, in closures, it is preferable to use a value of fe measured during an early
building stage, see Figure 4-16. Better results can be expected in the future when the
scouring can be computed as sediment transport, taking the local velocities and
turbulence into account. The sediment supply from upstream is then the input at the
upstream boundary of such a model.
4.3.6 Stability of protection
Scour itself is not a problem as long as it does not undermine the considered structure.
Figure 4-19a represents a situation with a stable scour hole that does not cause any
problem. In Figure 4-19b, the scour depth, in combination with the upstream slope of
the scour hole, has become too large and the upstream slope has slid. The bed
protection has been damaged, but the structure is still intact. After this has been
observed, repair is still possible, e.g. by dumping stones on the slope and on the


4, FLOW - EROSION 99
damaged protection. If the damage is not observed in time or if it is neglected, the
quality of the protection decides what happens next. If the protection is coherent, e.g.
because of a strong geotextile, and/or mats with sufficient overlaps have been used,
the consequences can be rather insignificant. But if the protection consists of loose
stones, the scouring process will go on, with even more vigour because of the shorter
protection length. The final result can be like the situation shown in Figure 4-19¢. In
that case, the protection is no longer effective and the structure will collapse.

— ® — ___ ©
Srucue prtecton =
Figure 4-19 Instability of bed protection
These examples clearly illustrate that the main function of a bed protection, is not to
minimize scour (see also Figure 4.15), but to keep the scour hole far away from the
structure that needs protection. To judge whether a protection is long enough, it is
necessary to know the upstream slope (in Figure 4-18, fr is the upstream slope, but
the subscript can now be left out), the depth of the hole, the stability parameters of the
slope and the process that will take place once the slope has become unstable.
The slope angle B
From the systematic scour research, Hoffmans, 1993, derived the relation:
2
p wes] 310 4 ati v(onto750)
Agdso (4.22)
(n=, fe =l for C<40)
40
indicating that velocity, turbulence, a smooth protection and fine sand, cause steep
slopes.
Figure 4-20 shows the results of Equation (4.22) for some likely values of the relative
turbulence, the velocity, the roughness of the protection and the grain diameter. For
the diameters used here (sand of 0.2 and 0.5 mm) the angle of repose, ¢, lies around
30°, hence cot ¢ . 2. The graphs indicate that steeper slopes are very much possible.
The model experiments showed no slopes steeper than 1:2, but in reality steeper slopes
and failures of these slopes have been observed. Figure 4-20 also indicates large
differences between calculated and measured values, so, a steep slope calculated using
Equation (4.22) should be seen as a warning. It is also important to measure the scour
as a function of time to be able to deal with maintenance, such as dumping protective
material on the slope.


100 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
storm <into «|6eiooo: (OCs.
Po Fee Fa LMeeeD 4
aL LSS 2N 3|_ ie
t?ereesS ft jeoroe t aes a Wan
iti] C i A {ZL
o—r(%) 05 o—r(%) 05 o> r(%) O5 1234567
d=02mm,C=40/ms d=05mm,C=40/ ms d=0.5mm,C=60¥ ms measured cot
Figure 4-20 Slope of scour hole vs u, r, d and C (after Hoffmans, 1993)
Stability and slides
When the slope becomes too steep with a certain height, it is no longer able to
withstand the gravitational forces and it will slide. Soil will move side- and downwards
and will result in a flatter slope. In sand, it can roughly be assumed that unprotected
slopes will slide when cot # #2 with h, > 5 - 10 m. Chapter 5 will discuss stability of
slopes in more detail; now the focus is on the process after stability is lost.
+; Densily packed sand +; Loosely packed sand
Soooy TT 20009.® © Qn dk
hoccomllincsss ssccMicose)
— tt — Tt
profile before slide profile before slide
Slide Flow-slide
Figure 4-21 Slides and flow-slides
Sliding occurs after a slope has lost its stability, see Figure 4-21a. The grains roll over
each other till the friction is sufficient to stop the sliding. Due to the inertia of the
moving soil mass, the final slope will be gentler than the angle of repose ¢. 1:6 can
serve as an indication of an average slope for densely packed sand.
When the soil consists of loosely packed sand, the situation is worse. Figure 4-21
shows the difference between loosely and densely packed sand. When a shear stress is
exerted on loose sand, the grains tend to a denser packing, producing an excess
pressure on the pore water and thus forcing it out of the pores, see Figure 4-21b, This
excess pore pressure in loosely packed sand decreases the contact forces between the
grains (the effective stress, see chapter 5) and hence, leads to a complete reduction of
the shear strength. The soil becomes, temporarily, a thick fluid. This phenomenon is
called liquefaction. The excess pore pressure can propagate as an elastic shock wave
through the sand, turning a large area into quicksand. The result is a much flatter slope
after failure than would result from a normal slide. Slopes of 1:25 have been reported;
an average value of 1:15 is usually a reasonable estimate, see Figure 4-21b. With
densely packed sand the reverse happens, water is sucked into the pores, leading to an
increase of the effective stress, see Figure 4-21a.


4, FLOW - EROSION 101
4.4 Summary
In general, local scour is a special case of sediment transport. The local velocity and
the turbulence pattern determine the local erosion. When this erosion takes place in a
flow in which sediment is transported, even without local disturbances, we speak of
live-bed scour. When the sediment transport is due to the local disturbance only, it is
clear-water scour, Scour develops in time, reaching an equilibrium depth when the
flow forces can no longer take away sediment (clear-water scour) or when the inflow
and outflow of sediment become equal (live-bed scour).
In literature, two main approaches to scour can be distinguished: one is to study the
final equilibrium scour and the other approach is to study development in time. The
choice depends on the interest of the designer and the process itself. When the
equilibrium is reached very quickly, it is of no use to know the development in time
and the design can be based on the final scour depth. When the process is slower, it
can be economical to study the development in time and to tune the design to a certain
maintenance policy. When scour is important during construction, it may be necessary
to know the scour as a function of time, since the geometry of the flow, and hence the
scour, will change continuously.
Without protection, the scour will reach equilibrium faster than with protection.
Empirical relations for scour in jets and around bodies are presented which can be
used for preliminary design purposes. An attempt has been made to give maximum
physical reasoning behind the empirical relations, although the physical basis of some
of these equations is meagre or virtually non-existent. Important relations are (4.9)
and (4.11).
In cases with protection, the scour as a function of time is coupled as much as possible
with turbulent flow phenomena. Equation (4.13) is the basis of this approach, in which
a paramount role is played by the coefficient a, which can be seen as a magnifying
factor for the velocity. @ is related to the relative turbulence of the flow, provided the
local velocity is used. The estimate of equilibrium scour in the case with protection
and the comparison with some formulas without protection, make the story as complete
as possible.
Finally, considerations are given concerning the stability of scour holes and bed
protections in which soil properties like the angle of repose and the packing of the
grains play a role. It is stressed that the scour itself is not the problem, but its threat
to the stability of a structure. The main function of protections behind outflows is to
keep the scour hole as far away as possible from the structure that needs to be
protected. Preventing scour is virtually impossible. Only in a flow field with
considerable local variations, like the field round a pier, it is possible to cover the area
with increased flow load, thus reducing scour depths.




5 POROUS FLOW - General
ry 4
gi
ook aie sseaiag Wi fas, Vi j
vi y
.
a #£
ee sees _ = Pe
en
eS See
Sa eee
Dike breach (Djikval) in Zeeland, The Netherlands


104 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

5.1 Introduction

Porous flow is the expression used for flow through a granular medium such as sand,
pebbles or stones. The loads due to porous flow often come from the soil side of the
soil-water interface, see Figure 5-1. As in open channel flow, pressures and velocities
are related and both can be considered as loads.

To Ra
: SHO,
Figure 5-1 Examples of loads due to porous flow
Under the impervious structure in Figure 5-la there is a resulting water pressure
against the bottom downstream, due to the head difference across the structure. To
counterbalance this pressure, the bottom of the structure should have enough weight.
The head difference also causes a flow under the structure, which, again, may cause
erosion at the downstream end, against which a filter may be necessary. If the bottom
of the structure is relatively short, the outflow at the end can cause piping, (where
erosion creates a "pipe"). The same phenomena occur with an impervious layer on a
slope, e.g. at a river bank or a dike (Figure 5-1b). Due to the slope, not only is weight
necessary to counterbalance the excess pressure, but friction between the layer and
the slope and support of the toe also play a role. At the toe, the outflow can, again,
necessitate a filter to prevent erosion. When the slope is not closed and consists of
loose grains, a head difference will cause seepage and possibly erosion (Figure 5-1c).
A milder slope may be necessary to prevent erosion. Finally, the flow over a bottom
protection consisting of large stones, which are stable themselves, will also cause flow
through the protection. This may, again, cause erosion at the interface underneath the
protection, for which a granular filter or a geotextile could be the right solution.

To create stable situations, a good insight into the porous flow phenomena and loads
is paramount. The following sections discuss the basic equations for porous flow and
some of their applications. It will be shown that, similar to open channel flow, porous
flow can be either laminar or turbulent. In ground masses consisting of clay or sand,
the flow is always laminar, leading to linear relations between pressure and velocity,
making computations relatively straightforward, In coarse material the flow is usually
turbulent, which causes the computations to be more complex. Coarse materials are
used in filters, sills, breakwaters, etc. For these applications the design still depends

heavily on empirical methods. Much research in this field remains to be done.


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 105
5.2 Basic equations
5.2.1 General
The starting point is again the Navier-Stokes equation, written in the Reynolds-form
for the x-direction (see Chapter 2):
sn 2 aye agg
Ou OH wot 1OP, ou _ Ou _ dul (6.1)
ot Ox Oz pox ez Ox Oz
With this equation the flow in a porous medium can be calculated, provided that every
stone and every pore is taken into account. This is, however, practically impossible
and, fortunately, not necessary. An averaging procedure can be followed to reach
practical solutions. The first step in this procedure is to define an average velocity, the
filter-velocity:
1 Vp
up=—||udd=n-u |n= (5.2)
ral J [ V;
in which n is the porosity and w the real velocity in the pores. The porosity, n, is usually
defined as the pore volume, Vp, divided by the total volume, Vr. This is not necessarily
a measure for the permeability (compare with Emmenthal cheese: many pores, but not
permeable), but for a normal grain-structure, n can be used also as a permeability
parameter.
Note: The averaging has to include enough pores to represent an average flow in a
process which is of a random nature. On the other hand, the area dd must be small
compared with the mean motion (LeMehaute, 1976), in other words: a large flow
pattern through relatively small grains. Wave action in the armour layer of a
breakwater with elements of several metres in size, is difficult to describe adequately
by porous flow formulae.
|
i
dulez i
1
i dulex lu
u |
i |
|
a |
|
x |
Figure 5-2 Velocities, gradients and averaging


106 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
The next step is to combine terms in Equation (5.1), see also Figure 5-2. The term
@uldz has a physical meaning in a particular pore, where there is a velocity gradient
from the centre of the pore to the grain (no slip at the boundary), but with an average
of many pores it becomes meaningless. It is common practice to combine all square
inertia and turbulence terms into one quadratic friction term and to replace the (linear)
viscous gradient with a linear friction term. (see also Van Gent, 1992, and Van Gent,
1993):
a 2
Fal ou l-n
FOP jean, sbujfuj[eoot wit, aa lt 2
pg ox ot NW gdinso (5.3)
l-n 1
pep)
nm £50
For stationary flow, @u/dt = 0, this is the classical Forchheimer-equation. The
influence of the third term is usually small and can be neglected in most cases. For
more information (also on the values for c) see Van Gent, 1993. In non-stationary,
oscillatory flow, the coefficient b in the second term has to be corrected with a factor
that depends on the wave cycle, see Van Gent, 1993. The expressions for the
coefficients a (s/m) and b (s?/m) have been derived theoretically while the
dimensionless coefficients a and f (that depend on, among other things, the grading
and the shape of the grains) have to be determined experimentally. Without any further
information, a ~ 1000 and #~ 1.1 can be used as a first estimate (with possible values
twice as low or twice as high). For more accurate values, it is better to measure a and
b ina laboratory or field test.
. i,
in LA If |r,
wot ZI) Ye ty. 7
[7 | ff | [|
(ae
r
s2__7 1 1 j |
10° 10° 10% 10° 10? 107
——>__u, (m/s)
Figure 5-3 Relation between filter velocity and gradient for various materials
Figure 5-3 shows measured gradients i and filter velocities uw for various materials
ranging from fine sand (dsp = 130 1m) to rubble 60-300 kg (dhso = 0.4 m). This double
logarithmic graph clearly shows that the flow in fine material is laminar: the relation
between i and 1 is linear, indicating that the relation is adequately described by the
first term of the right-hand side of Equation (5.1). For rock, the relation is quadratic


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 107
(slope 1:2 on double logarithmic scale), indicating that the second term dominates. In
between, as for gravel, both terms play a role.
Note: The transition between laminar and turbulent flow is more gradual than in open-
channel flow; beside turbulence, convective terms also play a role in the averaged
formula. Despite this difference, the flow types will be called laminar and turbulent.
The relation between velocity and pressure gradient is sometimes written as follows:
1
uy =k(i)p (5.4)
in which k is the permeability (m/s) of the porous material. For laminar flow, p = 1,
the Forchheimer-equation reduces to Darcy's law and k is the inverse of a in equation
(5.3). For turbulent flow p = 2. The following table gives an order of magnitude of the
permeability, k, as defined in Equation (5.4) of some materials:
Table 5.1 Values of k for various materials
Clay 0 -0.002 10" - 10° laminar
Silt 0.002 -0.063 10* - 10° laminar
Sand 0.063 -2 10° - 10° laminar
Gravel 2-63 10° - 104 transition
Small rock 63 -400 1o' - 5.107 turbulent
Large rock 400 - 1000 5.10'- 1 turbulent
5.2.2 Laminar flow
In case of laminar flow, Equation (5.3) reduces to Darcy’s law. It is sometimes more
convenient to use heads instead of pressures:
hazel (5.5)
Pw
where hi is the piezometric head or potential and z is the elevation above a defined
reference level. The Darcy relations for two dimensions now read:
oh oh
up=—-ky wy = ke SS (5.6)
’ “Ox ’ Oz
Darcy’s law is the equation of motion for laminar groundwater flow. To compute a
velocity and pressure distribution in a soil mass we also need to take into account the
continuity equation:


108 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
dup Ow,
7 OMF 9 (5.7)
dx 6z

Combining Darcy's law and the continuity equation, the Laplace equation is found:

oh oh

b+ ke =0 (5.8)

ax az
Equation (5.8) can be solved, but only for very simple geometries. Approximate
analytical solutions exist. For more complex situations, the equations can be solved
numerically (using either finite elements or finite differences), graphically (with a
rectangular flow net pattern) or with an electric analogon (based on the analogy
between Darcy’s law and Ohm's law for conductivity). Numerical solutions are easily
available nowadays, but for a first idea, a sketch of a graphical solution can be useful.
In the following sections, the numerical program MSEEP from Deltares has been used
in some examples.
The complete solution of Equation (5.8) is often presented as a rectangular pattern of
streamlines and equipotential lines, along which the piezometric head is constant, see
Figure 5-4.

waterpressure Z|
7 pf streamlines
ERS
71] iy
COPREEEEEEEEO
potential lines ain HEE Hr \
PPT rr
Figure 5-4 Groundwater flow under a caisson

Between two streamlines, the total amount of flow is constant. Equation (5.6) shows
that there will be no flow when the gradient of the piezometric head is 0. Hence, all
streamlines are perpendicular to equipotential lines (the bottom surface is always an
equipotential line since the piezometric level in the water is constant). With some effort
and skill it is possible to draw a flow net iteratively by hand leading to a rough insight
into the flow pattern and the pressures in the subsoil which are important for the
stability of structures and protections, see Figure 5-4.
Flow force
The structure of grains and pores cause friction for the flowing water. The other way
around, the water exerts a force on the grains (action = reaction). This is the flow force
(sometimes called the flow pressure, but its dimension is force per unit volume), which


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 109
is important in the stability of the grains at the outer boundaries of the soil. For the x-
direction (other directions similarly) it is given by:
. . oh
Fy = Pw8i= Pw
ax
(5.9)
5.3 Stability of closed boundaries
5.3.1 Impervious bed protections
In the case of a head difference across a bed protection, the pressures can often be
easily determined as shown in Figure 5-5. A flow net will be required to determine the
pressures under the protection layer when the flow geometry is more complex.
7 me?) {
impervious (| ae !
it) 1\
SSeS
: Ip \ |
=== nm 1
a -excess pressure
pressure|upperside  PowlllIfitmnesne— p,gh | | }
by Le “Bee ___+
t my a
pressure|underside H _ “Ste
ee + ———" 9, rsaiteg, | #080
Figure 5-5 Pressures in case of an impervious bottom protection
For a stable bottom protection, the vertical equilibrium has to be considered. The
maximum excess pressure Pmax depends on the location of the closure gate with respect
to the upstream and downstream ends of the bed protection. Assuming a linear pressure
distribution between the upstream and downstream ends of the protection:
L
Dmax ¥ —— Py gh (5.10)
Paws * Tp, Pw 8
The upward force per m? at the most unfavourable spot of the protection is Pnar + Pug
+ d) and the downward force: pngd + pygh leading to:
(2m - Pw) $4 > Pmax (6.11)


110 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Note: When the downstream waterlevel is lower than the upperside of the protection,
the weight of the water on top becomes zero. With a downstream waterlevel equal to
the underside of the protection, ,, has to be used in Equation (5.11) instead of
(Pm — pw). For a downstream waterlevel between the upperside and the underside of
the protection, only the use of all downward and upward forces that lead to Equation
(5.11), see also Figure 5-5, gives a correct result. The use of all forces is therefore
preferred above the use of Archimedes-type equations, in order to avoid mistakes.
Example 5-1
A 0.8 m thick protection with pn = 2000 kg/m® is situated as in Figure 5-5 (gate located
halfway the protection). The downstream waterlevel is equal to the underside of the
protection. The upstream level is 3 m higher. The downward pressure is then: 0.8x2000x g
= 16 kN/m?. The upward pressure is: 1/2x 3x 1000x g = 15 kN/m?, hence, the situation is
stable. The use of Equation (5.11), using pm, gives the same result.
Now, the downstream waterlevel is raised 1 m. On the downstream protection layer the
downward pressure then becomes: 0.8 2000x g + 0.2x 1000x g = 18 kNim?, The upward
pressure becomes: 1/2x 2x 1000x g + 1x 1000x g = 20 kN/m? so, now there is no equilibrium
at the most unfavourable spot. Equations (5.10) and (5.11) give: (2000-1000)x gx 0.8 = 8
kN/m? which is less than pmax (= 10 kKN/m?), so the same result is achieved. Even though
the head difference was reduced with 33%, the situation is no longer stable. Although a
somewhat hypothetic example, it clearly demonstrates the influence of buoyancy.
To design the thickness of the whole bottom protection to withstand the uplift pressure
Pmax is a conservative approach and if the material has some strength (e.g. concrete), a
protection that can resist a smaller p may be acceptable because other parts, where the
excess pressure is less, can contribute to the stability. When the material is easily
distorted (e.g. asphalt), it will be lifted locally, relieving the excess pressure with
minimal movement. This lifting acts like a valve and the system "breathes". As long
as no sediment from under the protection is lost and the protection does not crack,
occasional uplifting during extreme loads can be tolerated, provided inspections are
carried out frequently. For an asphalt protection with permanent loading, Equation
(5.11) should be obeyed (asphalt is a fluid!).
5.3.2 Impervious slope protections
The determination of the pressures against an impervious slope protection is more
complicated than for an impervious bottom protection. Figure 5-6 shows the flow net
and pressures for a slope of 1:2 with an impervious layer of negligible thickness,
reaching | m below the outer waterlevel and a head difference to the phreatic surface
inside of 1.5 m. Figure 5-6a shows the potential lines and streamlines as determined
using MSEEP. Figure 5-6b gives the pressures head (p/pg) directly under the
protection, compared with the hydrostatic values inside and outside the slope.


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 111
® — nS
Gene SET
waterlevel 75 EO RN
i <] = 6.0
@.ouste__+6 2) 2° NT NO
“S48 CEES 5. NPLN
CEE 0 1.0 20
VS22e5 “Pressure” (m)
69 a =o —— hydrostatic “pressure” inside
[~65—-—Y ——. “pressure” inside figure A
so-----~----1~-J--1--lL--1---—.-0 ~--— “pressure” outside
Figure 5-6 Flow net and pressures under an impervious layer on a slope
‘The values under the protection are lower due to the open slope below the protection.
The excess pressures follow from the difference between the pressure inside and
outside. The maximum excess pressure occurs at the level of the outside water surface
(+6 m) and is, according to MSEEP, about 0.7 m of head.
Approximate, analytical solutions are also available, see Figure 5-7. Under a
protection, for /i/(n + ho) < 0.8, the maximum excess pressure with regard to the
waterlevel on the slope in m of head can be approximated by (see TAW, 2000):
oz
sos 5
H = “arecos| 2[ MA cose jarsteneotadex!2 (5.12)
a hy +hy
HW = 08 ‘d=0 m
q = E 0g A sera na
—— HGW x he 0.2
fay Si 04) fy? \
j \
—- nme mem *, 0.4
MW hy 02| f A
H °9 02 04 06 08 10
— > hj(h,+h,)
Figure 5-7 Pressures under impervious slope protection
For the same slope as in Figure 5-6, the maximum excess pressure, H, is given in
Figure 5-7 as a function of //(+hn) and of the layer thickness d. The graph shows
for d = 0 and h(i +hx)=0.06: H = 0.7 m, which is equal to Figure 5-6. With a
protection of a certain thickness, the pressure at the bottom end will not be equal to the
piezometric level downstream, see also Section 5.3.1. This leads to a reduced excess
pressure.
With Equation (5.12) the maximum excess pressure can be computed when the
phreatic level inside the soil mass is given. As a first approximation, this level can be
approached with:


112 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
HGW =a(HW-MWL) (5.13)
in which HGW is the maximum ground water level, HV the maximum level outside
and MWL the average level outside. In a tidal area, a ~ 0.5 and in a river area a ~ 0.3.
For a detailed design, the use of a numerical model is recommended.
Note: the maximum excess pressure in Equation (5.12) occurs when In +ha) 0.5
(not to be confused with a in Equation (5.13) which only determines the position of
HGW). In the case when this maximum is reached for a level below MWL, MWL should
be used to determine /.
Figure 5-8 shows the forces that play a role in the equilibrium of an impervious layer
on a slope. The protection is loaded with the excess water pressure, H, which can be
determined, either with Equations (5.12) and (5.13) or with a numerical model. The
weight, IV, must counterbalance this load, either directly or via the shear force between
the layer and the slope.
2
F.
N= a Gee
: fe TTT
Wsina ~ MLE
h eC
= Z
—— shear, f= 0.5 acs a
peer TTT TTT TTT
F ——— uplift 0.
y 0 02 04 06 08 1
—— tana
Figure 5-8 Stability of impervious layer on slope
Shear under an impervious layer
The friction between protection and subsoil must be enough to balance the component
of the weight parallel to the slope. The friction depends on the effective weight
perpendicular to the slope. Stability for a length of slope Ax just below the
outside water level is ensured when:
1 [(Pm= Pw) gd Axcosa—HpygAx] > (Pm-Pw)gdAxsina (5.14)
in which fis the friction between layer and slope. This leads to a layer thickness:
H _ feosa~sina (5.15)
Ad f


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 113

Uplift

The protection is stable against uplift when there is equilibrium perpendicular to the

slope:

A
(Pm — Pw) gd Ax cosa > Hpygdx > fg 784 (5.16)

Note: Above the waterlevel p», should be used instead of (~~ px) in these formulas.

Figure 5-8 gives the necessary layer thickness for slopes between 0 and 45 degrees

using a friction coefficient, f= 0.5 and 1 respectively. For the other parameters, see

Example 5-2, From this we can sce the following:

- Fora horizontal layer (a= 0), there is no difference between shear and uplift,
or in other words: shear does not play a role.

- The shear criterion gives thicker layers than the uplift criterion, When tana
becomes f the necessary d becomes infinite, which, with fcosa= sina, directly
follows from Equation (5.15).

- A larger friction, f; is favourable, compare f= 0.5 with f= 1. For a very high
value of f, the results for shear and uplift will coincide. The protection is
“nailed”, so to speak, to the slope. But fis limited by the properties of the slope.
Tt can never be greater than tang, the internal friction of the slope material,
which becomes the weakest spot in the stability. For many cases, 2/3 tang can
be used as a first estimate for the value of f-

When the shear criterion is violated, part of the layer will hang on the upper part of the
protection with force F, in Figure 5-8. The tension in the layer can be computed by:
Fi = (om — po)-g-d'sinarL, where L is the length over which the shear criterion is
violated. Another possibility is that the protection is going to lean on the lower part,
which is again supported by the toe of the slope, with Fj. Actually, the whole
protection should be taken into account and all forces should be integrated. Depending
on the strength of the layer, violation of the shear failure should criterion should not
occur too often to avoid fatigue. E.g. under spring tide conditions, with a frequency of
occurence in the order of magnitude of weeks, the shear criterion should be met.

Uplift is worse: sand can move under the protection when it is lifted and the layer can

deform. The uplift criterion should be met in design circumstances, e.g. a fast fall of

water level after a storm.
Example 5-2
For a dike in a tidal area, a slope of 1:4 has to be protected with a layer of asphalt concrete,
Pm = 2450 kg/m’, py = 1020 kg/m, hence, A ~ 1.4. The friction coefficient between asphalt
and sand is f= 0.5. The protection extends from MWL -1 m up to 2 m above storm HW (see.
definitions in Figure 5-7). For a storm, HW is MWL + 4 m, while during springtide, HW =
MWL + 1.5 m. What is the necessary layer thickness to avoid shear failure and uplift?


114 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

With Equation (5.13) we find HGW during storm = 0.5x4 = MWL + 2 m, hence Ar + Az in

Figure 5-7 = 3 m. With Equation (5.12) and a first estimate of d = 0.5 m we find a maximum,

excess pressure, H ~ 0.65 m for fi/(hi + hz) = 0.5. During an extreme storm, only uplift is

taken into account, hence, from Equation (5.15) we find: d = 0.65/(1.40.97) ~ 0.48. With

this value, the iterative calculation is repeated, finally leading to d = 0.46.

This result is checked for shear during springtide. HGW then is MWL + 0.75 m and hi + ho

= 1.75 m. With d = 0.46 m, we now find a maximum H = 0.3 m for hi/(hi + hz) = 0.5. From

Equation (5.14) we find d = 0.44 m. So, the situation during a storm is normative.
Note: The Equations (5.15) and (5.16) give a rather conservative approach, as no
cohesion in the asphalt layer is assumed and the thickness is determined by the most
unfavourable spot of the revetment. For the layer as a whole, the thickness can be taken
to be parabolic along the protection length with the maximum thickness derived as
outlined above and the minimum thickness determined by construction aspects (0.1 —
0.2 m).
5.4 Stability of open boundaries
5.4.1 Heave and piping
When there is a head difference across a hydraulic structure, there will always be some
seepage, as soil is never completely impervious. When the flow force in a porous flow
becomes greater than the weight of the grains, these grains will float and some
sediment transport can occur. This failure mechanism is called heave, while the
process is often called fluidisation of the soil. Problems get out of hand when erosion
progresses and a continuous channel, a "pipe", develops, see Figure 5-9. When the
load remains, this process will lead to progressive failure because the seepage length
shortens continuously. This failure mechanism is called piping.

~ Ah.
i L ;
undisturbed beginning growth complete
situation of heave of pipe piping
Figure 5-9 Heave and piping under structure
Theoretically, heave starts at the downstream end when the upward flow force, see
Equation (5.9) is equal to the weight of the soil:
Pw ix(1-n)(pe—Pw)S (5.17)


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 115
which, with a specific mass of the grains, py ~ 2650 kg/m’ and porosity n ~ 40% gives
ic = 1. In practice however, lower values for the critical gradient are found, due to
irregularities in the porous medium which lead to a concentration of the flow. The
same result will be found when the specific weight of saturated soil (, ~ 2000 kg/m’)
is used: (1- n)(pe— pw) = 0.6x(2650 — 1000) ~1000 = ps — pv ¥ 2000-1000 kg/m’, see
also Intermezzo 5-1. Equation (5.17) can also be expressed as the equilibrium of any
soil layer, with thickness d:

1 p,-
h, ~h,< —d Ps—Pw (5.18)
y Pw
Ju is the piezometric level under the soil layer, and hy above, (Iu — h)/d= i. yis a safety
coefficient, e.g. 2, due to irregularities of the soil. Equation (5.18) can be used for
heave of cohesionless soils, like sand, or for a bursting clay layer.
The classical approach to these phenomena is by Bligh and by Lane dating back to the
first decades of the 20" century. The critical head difference is given by:
he c_1 (5.19)
L Coreep
In terms of a stability parameter, Ah is the load and L is the strength. Bligh and Lane
gave two (slightly different) explicit formulae for the calculation of L and for the
constants C.yeep- No clear distinction is drawn between heave and piping.
In more recent years, much research has been carried out concerning piping in
connection with the raising of the dikes in the Netherlands. The generally accepted
analysis is by Sellmeijer (1988). This model consists of a numerical solution of the
relevant differential equations. Not only the threshold of piping but also the transport-
ation of grains through an already formed channel was taken into account. Sellmeijer’s
model was made more accessible, and easier to apply in practice, by curve-fitting
through the results (see Calle/Weijers 1994). In addition to the Bligh and Lane
methods, the thickness D of the sandy aquifer under the dike is now also taken into
account.


116 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 5-1
Water and grains: different approaches
There are several ways to deal with forces and A second example is a system of two
stresses in soil, These different approaches communicating vessels, which are open at the
can all be correct, but should not be mixed up. top. The first, 1 m high, is filled with water
To illustrate some of these ways, two simple and sand. The second, 2 m high, is filled with
examples are given. First, a vessel of | mand water. The head difference causes a flow
2 m high filled with water and with | m‘ of _ which is replenished with Q.
sand is considered. With a porosity of 40% Q
and a specific mass of 2650 kg/m’ of the 2
grains, the specific mass of wet sand
becomes: 0.6x2650 + 0.4x1000 ~ 2000 4H
kg/m*, The total weight of water and sand in
the vessel is 30 KN, resulting in a (total) stress «@, 1 water
on the bottom of 30 kN/m?.
2
water
Lv
4 effective
stress
|
zs \
wat
pressure
° 9 10 20 30
The strength of soil depends on the effective
stresses. According to Terzaghi these stresses | wate water
are: o’= o~p in which cis the total stress, 0” —_| pressure pressure
is the effective stress and p the water pressure. 0 20 0 20
Since the water pressure is omnipresent, the ‘The total stress at the bottom is 20 kN/m?
effective grain stress on the bottom of the (either from the wet sand: 1 x 2000 x g of
vessel is 30 — 20 = 10 kN/m’. The same result from the water: 2 x 1000 x g). The effective
is obtained with Archimedes’ law: The grain stress at the bottom of the vessel with
effective weight of the grains on the bottom Sand is now: o’= op = 20 ~20 0 kN/nv.
result in an effective grain stress: 0.6x(2650- §6 there is no effective grain stress and the
1000)xg = 10 KNim’. A third way to arrive at” soi] has no strength. It is liquefied and acts
this value is to think of 1 m’ of wet sand jike a fluid. The same result is found when the
packed in plastic foil under water. The flow force is considered. According to
effective grain stress then becomes: (2000 — Equation (5.9):
1000)xg = 10 kN/m’. Fy = pw x g x AH/L = 1000 x 10 x 1/1 = 10
kN/m’, This compensates again the effective
weight of the grains under water: 10 kN/m’.
The flow force also doubles the gradient of
the water pressure in the vessel with sand.
Figure 5.10 gives a definition sketch for the various calculation methods and shows a
comparison between the allowable head difference calculated with the classical
methods (in this case, Bligh) and the Sellmeijer-method. Especially for relatively thin
sand layers the difference between the methods is large. Based on Sellmeijer’s method


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 117
safety rules concerning piping in dikes in the Netherlands have been established. In
most situations a reduction of the required dike width (=seepage length) appeared to
be possible, although in recent years this model has been subject of some controversy
after some dikes have been proven to have withstood larger loads than Sellmeijer’s
criterion would have predicted, and vice versa. This has resulted in more specific (and
still on-going) research. For a state-of-the-art is referred to Forster et al., (2011)

sand (0.2mm) L=50m
al e"T | TTT |
5
aN a
burst’ 10 L_|
2 L os D | gh |_| —
eS |
sand ° S===
0 10 20 30 40 50
— Dim)
Figure 5-10 Definitions and results Sellmeijer method
5.4.2 Micro-stability of slopes
With micro-stability the stability of the outer grains on a slope is meant, in contrast to
the stability of the slope as a whole, the macro-stability, see Section 5.5. Figure 5-11
shows the streamlines and equipotential lines in a dike with a head difference. The
phreatic surface coincides partly with the downstream slope, which is practically
always the case. That means that there is always a part of the downstream slope where
groundwater flows through the slope. This is important in determining the stability.
SS hreatic surface
ROSS
A SSS SSS ee
streamlines \~{— SSS e a eee]
equipotential lines
Figure 5-11 Porous flow in a dike (results MSEEP)
The equilibrium of grains on a slope in flow has been discussed before, but the load
now comes from the inside of the slope. Here we cannot consider the stability of a
single grain, since we have averaged the flow over all pores by means of uy, see Section
5.2.1. By doing so, we have given up all information on velocities in the pores and
instead we consider a unit volume of soil.


118 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Wsina F,cos(a-0) F,
ee _
ae Weosa ;
F,sin(a-6)
<a _
Ww
Figure 5-12 Forces on slope with porous flow
The equilibrium of forces on a unit volume of soil, without porous flow and cohesion,
simply gives, again, see Figure 5-12a:
pP.gcoosatang>p,gsina > g2a (5.20)
This equation is valid above and under water, since ,, the mass density of the soil,
vanishes from the equation. It can be the density of dry or wet soil, with or without
effects of the buoyancy. Indeed, above and under water, a cautiously built up slope,
can have a maximum angle, @, equal to the angle of repose, ¢.
Now with porous flow, see Figure 5-12b, the soil being under water, Equation (5.9) is
valid and the situation can be described as follows:
[(Ps - Pw) g cosa ~ pygisin(a—8) |tan p> (621)
(ps — Pw) gsina + pygicos(a—)
With p, ~ 2000 kg/m} and p= 1000 kg/m? this simplifies to:
sina +icos(a-@
tang > sina +i cos(a—9) (5.22)
cosa —isin(a—@)
Without porous flow (i= 0), this again gives ¢> ar for stability. Some special cases of
the equilibrium with porous flow are treated in the next sections.
Horizontal seepage
When seepage flows horizontally through a slope, 9 = 0 and i = tan a, see
Figure 5-13a. This situation can result from seepage through a dike, from a sudden fall
of the waterlevel outside a revetment or from heavy rainfall on a revetment.


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 119
® nia 1 © h+ Lina, e
ee a iI
a |
sd | ll e ox
Figure 5-13 Flow gradients and micro-stability
The demand for stability from Equation (5.22) then becomes:
tan p> Sin tan a cose _ 2sing _
cosa@—tanasin@ cosa —sin” a/ cosa (5.23)
2sin @ cosa
= tan2a > 22a
cos’ @—sin” a
in other words: given a soil type, the permissible slope angle is half the angle of repose.
For example, with ¢= 30°, this leads to a= 15° or a slope of 1:3.5.
Seepage parallel to the slope
The gradient of the flow now becomes: i= sin a and @= a. With Equation (5.22) this
simply gives:
sina +sina
tang > —————_ > tang>2tana (5.24)
cosa
which is a little more favourable than Equation (5.23). This situation can occur if water
flows over a dike or/and if a relatively permeable layer is situated on less permeable
soil.
Seepage perpendicular to the slope
When the seepage takes place under water, the slope surface is an equipotential line
and the flow will be perpendicular to the surface. In that case, 9= a— 90° giving:
sing
tang >——— (5.25)
cosa—i
For a= 0, this again gives i = | for fluidisation of the soil.
Note: One of the assumptions in Equation (5.22) was no cohesion. A slope consisting
of clay or loam can, of course, be much steeper.


120 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
5.5 Macro stability of slopes
The stability of a slope as a whole is usually referred to as the macro-stability, in
contrast to the micro-stability which deals with the outermost grains on a slope, see
Section 5.4.2. Micro-stability is a limit case of macro-stability, as we will see later on.
Seeeeeee|
CCCECITY) centre points
HATE
[sey PY,
Me MEY,
(1 | Ro AZ A
Figure 5-14 Slip circle approach of macro-stability
Macro-stability is usually approached with a slip-circle analysis, for which the Bishop-
method is widely used, see Verruijt, 1999. The general idea is again an analysis of load
versus strength; the load being the weight of the soil mass within the circle and the
strength being the shear along the circular slip surface, see Figure 5-14. Since both
load and strength can now be expressed in the same units (force, considering the
equilibrium around the centrepoint of the circle), the stability can be expressed by a
coefficient, F, which is the strength divided by the load. When F > 1 the slip circle is
stable and when no circles with F < 1 can be found, the slope is stable (within the
limits of accuracy of the calculation method).
‘As known from soil mechanics, shear stress depends on the normal stress, so the
resisting shear will vary along the circle. A practical solution for the analysis is thus to
divide the soil above the circle into slices. The shear strength in the soil with regard to
the maximum possible shear is then given by:
1 1
t=—(c+o,' tan ¢)=—(c+(o, — p)tang) (5.26)
F F
where c is the cohesion of the soil, p the water pressure and o» and on’ the total and
effective stresses normal to the slip circle, respectively, see also Intermezzo 5-1. The
equilibrium around the centre point of the circle, for all slices, gives (per m width), see
Figure 5-14:
LpghwRsina=Dr——R (5.27)
COS a&
Combining Equations (5.26) and (5.27) gives the total strength divided by the load:


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 121
=| (c+, 'tang)/cosa
pa ZLleton'tand)/coser| (5.28)
Xp, ghsina
Note: Wet soil is heavier than dry soil and the effective grain-stresses are influenced
by the pore water pressures (o;’= oy — p), 0 pore water influences both the loading
and the strength. A critical situation occurs after high sea or river levels, when the
waterlevel suddenly drops and the slope is filled with water, increasing the load while
the water pressures decrease the strength. The same can happen due to heavy rainfall.
In the Bishop method, the effective normal stresses are computed from the vertical
equilibrium in every slice (see also Figure 5-14 and Verruijt, 1999):
w w A
Ps Zhw=o, cosa—+rsina— > p,gh=o,+pt+ttana
cosa cosa
(5.29)
With Equation (5.26) we find:
oy (1+ ABE p, gh p—Stana (5.30)
Substituting o;,' from Equation (5.30) into Equation (5.28) finally leads to:
y c+(psgh-p)tang
Pe cosa(1+tana tan¢/F) (631)
Xp.ghsina
Going from Equation (5.28) to (5.31), eliminates the unknown o’, Now, F can be
computed from all slices iteratively, since F occurs on both sides of the equation. This
iterative computation is valid for one slip circle. To determine the minimal value of F
for a given slope, several centre points with shallow and deep circles have to be
evaluated, see Figure 5-14.
Usually many slip circles with many slices have to be evaluated, so this is typically a
task for a computer, Many computer codes are available for this purpose, in the
Netherlands e.g. STABIL of Delft University of Technology or D-GEO STABILITY
(formerly called MSTAB) of Deltares. The following examples are based on MSTAB.
First we check the relation with micro-stability. Micro-stability can be approximated
with a very shallow slip circle. A 10 m high slope 1:3 has a phreatic level that intersects
the slope at a level of 5 m. At the intersection with the slope the gradient is equal to


122 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
tana, which is equivalent to the case of horizontal outflow. From micro-stability we
know that, in that case, the equilibrium is reached when a= #/2, giving $= 37°.
43
10m Senn. Phreatic
oe level
Hs, ae
os c=0
Se 4=37°
—— F=4.0-1,2-16-1.9-21-23
Figure 5-15 F-values for various slip circles with one centre point
Figure 5-15 gives the results for various shallow and deep slip circles for this case. The
very shallow circle gives F = 1. The other circles give higher values, since more
favourably situated adjoining slices make the situation more stable. So, indeed, the
seepage surface is the most unstable part of the slope and the micro-stability rules
should be obeyed there. Other parts of t he slope are less vulnerable. Note that the pore
pressures from the phreatic level in the computation give the same result as the flow
force approach in Section 5.4.2, see also Intermezzo 5-1. So, both approaches are
appropriate and it would be wrong to take both mechanisms into account.
7 F-| Wa me
iy]: \ 4g '
4 4) |:
f }t
0.85 '
5 f
f [) 43
' Lil)
' id IS Phreatic
is >
ww c=0 level
----~Aype i) a
ts
i =20
c=0
=37
0, rs as a
Figure 5-16 Critical slip circle with a weak soil layer
When there is a considerable inhomogenity in the soil, sliding will take place along
the weakest layers, where c and/or tang are low and hence the shear strength is low. In
Figure 5-16, the same geometry as in Figure 5-15 is applied, with the same phreatic
level, but now with a 1 m thick layer with a much lower strength (¢ = 20°). The
minimum value for F is now 0.85 for a circle passing through the weak soil layer.


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 123
Around the given centre point, lines of equal F have been drawn for other centre points.
Actually, the failure will now be determined by the position of the weak layers and the
failure surface is not necessarily a circle anymore, but can be any shape. However, to
find weak spots, an approach with circles can still be very useful. So, when an
embankment is constructed with such a weak layer in the subsoil (possibly caused by
some recent sedimentation of mud), it should always be removed, for even a gentle
slope of 1:3 is not stable in this case.
The same can occur when o! is low due to high pore pressures. Again for the same
geometry as in Figure 5-15, this is demonstrated in Figure 5-17. Now, a clay layer of
high strength (¢ = 37°, c = 20 kN/m?) is present under the slope, but under this layer,
the piezometric level has the same value as upstream inside the slope (assumed to be
the result of some connection between the upstream side and the subsoil). This gives
high pore pressures in the deeper subsoil, causing zero shear stresses (o' = op, with
O'min = 0 and r= + oF tang). Most shear comes from the clay layer, due to the
cohesion, and some shear is present above the clay layer where there is no excess
pressure. The resulting F is now very low: 0.32.

F=0.32 42
-y aay °°” eas af ot) a
STOTT oe c=20 >See 18) 03
SAT S87 piczematic SUN”
TTS “0 nee
pore pressures es shear stresses
Figure 5-17 Slip circle with high pore pressures

Summarizing: when no computercode for stability computations is available, an
approach with micro-stability gives a safe slope angle for homogeneous soil. This
angle should always be applied on the part of the slope with seepage, where micro-
stability is an important failure mechanism. Inhomogenity of the soil can give, usually
unpleasant, surprises when no soil data are available.
For a more detailed treatment of soil mechanical aspects, see Verruijt (1999) or CUR
162 (1992).
5.6 Load reduction
Porous flow can cause problems in two different ways: by pressures or by flow. These
are closely related as follows from the basic equations and the presentation of
streamlines and potential. When the porous flow velocities are too high and piping
forms a threat, the seepage length should be increased. This, however, can lead to
higher pressures in the underground. When the pressures are too high, a drain can be
constructed, which can again lead to erosion. So, load reduction in porous flow is
ambiguous.


124 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
sea side estuary side
storm surge barrier
7] _ gate (openiclosed)
~ sill " =
Seton preeion i Seren scour hole
ee
sandbed
Figure 5-18 Flow under gate
As an example we consider a situation, based on the Eastern Scheldt storm surge
barrier. With a head difference of more than 5 m and a gate structure with a width of
the same order of magnitude, the flow through the sill reaches very high values, see
Figure 5-18, with the danger of erosion and piping. For some schematized cases we
will demonstrate the various options to reduce the load. For a 40 m thick sandbed with
k= 0.0001 m/s and a head difference of 5 m across a 5 m wide gate, the equipotential
lines and streamlines are computed with the finite element program MSEEP, see Figure
5-19.
Note: In this example, only the porous flow aspect will be treated. Scouring or stone
stability under or behind an open gate is not considered.
£ SMe w= 5m 2
6 ee os [34] YO,
KY ey 0 ‘ TH 7
Wy WS 2
COSSETICN RN
Bley meth (Soar |), 2; 2 excl ee Pease fits 2...) (3); =n esi Weeetneeebros
Ce O_o,
SS re eee ll
— Ee SSS
Foes eS Sere,
pt @+@—+ o_O Geharteterk
® Piezometric head compared <=) Percentage of total flow
with downstream waterievel [15] compared with case A
Figure 5-19 Various options of load reduction at barrier, based on MSEEp
Figure 5-19a shows the situation without any measures. Where the gate touches the
bottom, a high concentration of streamlines and equipotential lines is found, indicating
large velocities and gradients. The total number of stream lines in the four cases in
Figure 5-19 differ such that the distance between the streamlines represents more or
less the same amount of flow for all cases; since the total resistance in case a is much
smaller than in the other cases, many more streamlines have been drawn for Case (a),
see also the total discharges, indicated in the figure as a percentage of the discharge in


5. POROUS FLOW - GENERAL 125
Case (a). The maximum gradient of the piezometric head in Case (a) is about 100%
(5m/S5m), which will definitely lead to erosion due to piping, see Section 5.4.1.
A reduction of this load can be achieved by adding an impervious horizontal or vertical
protection, creating a larger seepage length. Figure 5-19b shows the effect of a vertical
continuation of the gate into the bottom to a depth of 20 m. The total seepage is about
3 times smaller and the maximum gradient about 5 times smaller than in Case (a). This
means a significant reduction of the porous flow load for this case. Special care will
be needed during the construction of such a screen, since any leak can bring back the
situation of Case (a).
Figure 5-19c gives the results for a 100 m long impervious bottom protection at each
side of the gate. The total remaining seepage is now only 15% of that in Case (a). The
subsoil now simply becomes a horizontal tube with vertical potential lines at equal
distances, which can easily be calculated without the aid of a computer. Immediately
downstream of the gate, the piezometric level in the subsoil is 2.5 m compared with
the downstream waterlevel. This also means an excess pressure of 2.5 m water under
the bottom protection. To avoid lifting, the weight of the protection should be large
enough, see Section 5.3.
A hole, 10 m wide, 25 m downstream of the gate acts as a drain or valve and reduces
the maximum excess pressure with more than | m, see Figure 5-19d. At the same time,
it introduces a concentrated outflow through the hole. A filter on top of the hole may
be necessary to avoid piping, but this seems much more manageable than in the
situation of case a. One should be certain, however, that the filter functions properly.
Dirt or the growth of plants or shellfish, can reduce the permeability, leading again to
higher pressures.
Note: An impervious protection layer of sufficient length upstream from the gate,
without any protection downstream, will prevent piping while not causing any excess
pressure trouble downstream. For other reasons, this is not a practical solution:
downstream of a gate, a protection will be needed against scouring in case of flow
through the gate while in a tidal area, upstream and downstream reverses all the time.
5.7 Summary
Porous flow, the flow through the pores of a granular medium, can be described with
the same laws as open channel flow, but can only be described adequately when
averaged over many pores. The basic equation is the (extended) Forchheimer
equation.

LEP = = ay + buy lus] + ML
pg ox ot


126 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
in which a laminar part and a turbulent part can be discerned, as in open channel
flow. The flow through fine material, like clay or sand, is laminar for which the
Forchheimer relation reduces to Darcy's law. In combination with the continuity
equation, this can be translated, either graphically or numerically, into equipotential
lines and streamlines. With this information about loads (pressures and velocities), the
stability of various porous flow situations can be judged. For turbulent porous flow,
as in rock, the knowledge is often still insufficient and empirical relations have to be
used in design computations.
Impervious protections have to withstand occurring pressures. Weight and friction are
the parameters that determine the stability of protections without internal strength.
When weight and friction of a protection on a slope are insufficient, tension forces will
occur in the protection, which the material has to withstand. The internal strength of
e.g. concrete slabs against pressures perpendicular to the slab, is beyond the scope of
this book.
Open boundaries have to withstand the flow forces in the soil, for which the
equilibrium is expressed as follows:

Pw8i = (1-)(P.— Pw)
Heave is the phenomenon which occurs when this equilibrium is violated and piping
is the subsequent ongoing erosion downstream of a relatively impervious structure. To
avoid heave and piping, the seepage length has to be sufficiently great, to keep the
gradients in the subsoil low. On a slope, seepage can cause micro-instability if the
slope is too steep. To avoid this, the slope angle should be about half the value of the
angle of repose of the slope material, ¢.
Macro-instability occurs when the sliding forces in a slope exceed the friction forces,
determined by soil properties, such as cohesion, c, and angle of repose, @. High water
pressures inside have an unfavourable influence on the stability. The same is true for
a layer in the subsoil with low values of c and ¢.


6 POROUS FLOW - Filters
s — ’

= — ahaa | ‘ ee °

SO, Se os ee

= ‘ ii ~ .
> 4 I) = a4
i ee ee Miljipig-<

‘ Sy
> “SI
Granular filter and a geotextile under a Hydroblock revetment (photo H.J. Verhagen)


128 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
6.1 General
Filters can have different functions: preventing erosion of the covered subsoil or
preventing pressure build-up in the covered subsoil (drainage) or a combination of
both. Figure 6-1 gives some examples of filters.

® © ©

Pe ef

Sand [BM Fine Gravel 98098 Coarse Gravel GD, Rock
III) Asphatt - Stone mixture HB asphait ---+ Geotextile
Figure 6-1 Examples of filters

Filters against erosion
Filters as a protection against erosion are particularly needed in situations with large
gradients on the interface between soil and water, either the bank or the bottom.
Examples are a dam with a head difference, such as a caisson dam or a storm surge
barrier, where gradients of more than 10 % parallel to the interface are possible (AH =
(O)m, L = (0)10 m). That gradient is usually two or three orders of magnitude smaller
in open water flow (slope in rivers ~ (O) 0.001 - 0.0001). In open channel flow,
however, the flow velocity and the turbulence of the flow can penetrate through the
large stones of a bottom protection. The main function of protective filters, is to
prevent the washing away of the underlying material. That means that the underlying
grains (usually referred to as the base layer) should not pass the pores of the upper
layer (the filter layer). This can be prevented either by one or more layers of grains of
varying diameter, a granular filter, see Figure 6-1a, or a geotextile, see Figure 6-1b.
Figure 6-lc shows an example of a prefabricated combination, where stones with a
diameter ofa few cm are "glued" together with asphalt on a geotextile, reinforced with
steel cables if necessary. With these relatively modern protection mats, it is possible
to realise a reliable and large protection relatively fast. The possible combinations of
granular material, geotextiles, glues and reinforcements seem almost unlimited
nowadays, see also Appendix A - Materials. It should be kept in mind, however, that
many of these highly specialized products only become economically attractive when
very large quantities are used. So, for many projects, protections with granular material
and standard geotextiles, constructed on the spot, should be considered first in a design.
Moreover, for protections that have to last very long (say more than 100 years), the
lifetime of most geotextiles cannot be guaranteed yet. For this reason, the sill in the
Rotterdam Waterway Storm Surge Barrier (1994), was completely constructed with
granular material.


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 129
Drainage filters
A filter for drainage, see Figure 6-14, can help to prevent high excess pressures under
an impervious revetment, which is the second possible main function of a filter.

® ®
7 , g-® i g@ 26
© A | OMe NS
Pe iatey 00S RO eccicccaten
(Aare COSHH
Poor CPEEHATH
@ piezometric level compared with \? total discharge
outside waterlevel
Figure 6-2 Influence of filter on flow under impervious dike revetment

Figure 6-2 shows the influence of a filter at the toe of a dike (sand with k = 0.0001
m/s) with an impervious revetment. A 1 m thick and 2 m wide gravel filter (k = 0.1
m/s) is placed at the toe. The filter reduces the maximum excess pressure under the
revetment with 0.5 m (see lines of equal piezometric level: without filter, near the
watersurface, the potential = 1.5 m while with filter the potential ~ 1 m). Another effect
is the decrease of the gradient in the sand. Although the filter "attracts" seepage, it is
less concentrated than without filter (see the distance between streamlines at the toe in
Figure 6-2a and at the transition between sand and gravel in Figure 6-2b). Of course,
the filter itself should be able to resist the concentrated upflow and to prevent piping,
which is also a type of erosion, for which extra layers of material can be necessary
between the sand and the gravel.
For filters against erosion the emphasis is on stability, while permeability, in order
to prevent pressure build-up, is the main property of drainage filters. But actually, both
aspects play a role, as illustrated by the above example of the drainage filter, which
had to prevent erosion due to piping. In fact, both stability and permeability are
important in any filter design. Ina filter that is only meant to prevent erosion, pressure
build-up due to insufficient permeability also has to be avoided in order to prevent
lifting or sliding of a filter layer. Being closed for the base material and permeable for
water are opposing demands; a solution has to be found within the boundaries of
possibility. The usual approach in design is to establish the necessary diameter for the
stability of the top layer in waves and currents, to check the filter relations between
the top layer and the original (base) material and to add a geotextile or as many
granular layers in between as necessary to meet the filter demands. In the coming
sections, rules to dimension these filters will be given.
An overview of the most relevant aspects of modern filter design is published in
CUR,1993.


130 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
6.2 Granular filters
6.2.1 Introduction
The design of a granular filter can be based on different criteria, two of which will be
discussed here. Figure 6-3 presents the relation between the critical gradient in porous
flow, above which grains from the base layer are no longer stable under the filter layer,
and the quotient of some representative diameters, to be defined later on, of the the
two layers. The gradient is, again a relation between load and strength: / = AH/L, where
the head difference is the load and the length can be interpreted as the strength. As
with other load and strength parameters presented before, / can be seen as a mobility
parameter and J. as a stability parameter.

8

=

ze

ge

ck] Ses Geometrically open filter,
35 unstable (I > I.)
gs
| 5s @)
ge
Geometrically open filter,
@ stable (I <I.)
a ae
Figure 6-3 Possible design criteria for granular filters

In this figure two areas without erosion can be discerned:
1 Geometrically closed: These are the classical filter rules formulated by Terzaghi in
the thirties. The stability of the filter depends on the geometrical properties of the
materials, the sieve curves. The size of the grains is chosen such that they cannot move
in the filter. This often leads to a conservative design, since the filter can stand any
load: there is no critical gradient for the transition between the two layers. The filter
layer diameters are a few times to one order of magnitude larger than the base layer
diameters and the permeability of the filter layers has to be checked carefully.
2 Geometrically open: The grains of the filter layer are much larger than those of the
base layer, thus allowing grains in the latter layer to move in and through the filter
layer. But, like stability in open channel flow, there will only be erosion when the load
is higher than some critical value. A critical filter gradient can now be determined and
a filter is stable, when this critical gradient is larger than the occurring gradients in the
structure. So, now the hydraulic loads are taken into account, leading to a more
economic design. The disadvantage, compared with a geometrically closed filter, is


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 131
that detailed information on the loading gradients is now necessary. Permeability is
usually assured as these filters are more open than the geometrically closed filters.
Sometimes, some loss of material is accepted within the limits of admissible
settlements, which leads to even larger quotients of filter and base diameters. This
design approach is rather complicated and will not be treated.

6.2.2 Geometrically closed filters
The idea behind a geometrically closed filter is the following, see Figure 6-4. The
space between packed grains is much smaller than the grains themselves. For spheres
with equal diameter D, this space can be blocked by a sphere with a diameter which is
about 6 times smaller than D, see Figure 6-4a.
Een A
A B ys 4
sao) % aoe Ltt? / £/_|
7 pi nent & iS <
YS “if Po thls [|_|
: e 4
2) RES” | eee
7 > permeability PT
Principle of geometrically closed filter 0
—> sieve size
Figure 6-4 Blockage of particles and sieve curves for geometrically closed filters
Ina layer of grains with varying diameter, the space between the grains is governed
by the smaller grains, with say dis, the sieve diameter which is passed by only 15% of
the mass of grains. So, the escape route in the filter layer is determined by dis¢ in
Figure 6-4b. The largest grains of the base layer, dssa in the figure, get stuck in the
pores of the filter layer and block the passage of all other grains of the base layer,
provided the base layer is internally stable. This means that the range of grain
diameters in the base layer should not be too large, so that the larger grains can block
the smaller ones.
In order to prevent pressure build-up, the permeability of a filter layer should be larger
than the permeability of the base layer. Since the permeability is also governed by the
smallest grains, this leads to a relation between the d)s of both layers. In words, we
just described three relations for a geometrically closed granular filter: stability
between filter layer and base layer, permeability and internal stability. In formula,
based on experiments:
d . di ay A
Stability. =" <5 IntStability, “2 <10 Permeability, 2" >5 (6.1)
dssp do Asp
The demands for stability and permeability are contradictory: according to the stability
tule dr should be smaller than 5dg and for permeability larger than Sdg. However, the


132 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
use of two different diameters for the base material in the denominator (the 15% largest
and the 15% smallest, respectively) gives the margin to be able to design a filter, see
Figure 6-4c. The three parts of Equation (6.1) form a unit and are actually all stability
rules: the first rule prevents movements of the larger grains from the base layer, which
together with the third rule guarantees the stabilty of all grains in the base layer; the
second rule prevents pressure build-up and guarantees the stability of the filter layer
as a whole. The permeability rule is especially important when there is a large gradient
perpendicular to the interface. See also Intermezzo 6-1.
Intermezzo 6-1
The permeability rule is meant to prevent The answer has to be found in the stability and
pressure build-up at the interface between two the migration of grains. Without any mi-
layers. Why should disr be 5 times larger than gration, the piezometric levels would look
djsq when the only aim is to have a greater like the solid line ("filter"): a larger gradient
permeability in the filter layer than in the base _ in the base layer than in the filter layer, due to
layer in order to prevent pressure build-up? a difference in permeability. In a single layer,
Why is two times greater not enough? where no migration occurs when it is
According to this rule, pressure build-up internally stable, it would look like the dotted
could even occur within a layer where after line ("homogeneous"). The stability rule in
all "disr/disa" = 1. Equation (6.1) prevents the larger base layer
Piezometric level grains to move. Migration of smaller grains at
\ the interface is possible until the internal
tow | \\ — iter stability closes off the base layer. Some
1\ \ —— homogeneous migration of grains at the interface will
4 AY ai always occur and the permeability rule is
\ meant to prevent blocking of the interface
(pel \i with these grains, which would cause the
aN dashed line ("blocking") and possibly lifting
ofthe iter faye
With these rules, a stable and permeable filter can be designed, either starting from the
original (in situ) soil as base layer or from the top layer which is necessary for stability.
This can lead to more than two layers in the filter, sometimes even to 4 or 5. When
using the relations in Equation (6.1), the finest layer of each pair is named the base
layer and the coarsest the filter layer.
Example 6-1
What filter material is needed on top of sand with dso = 0.4 mm when the geometrically
closed filter rules have to be obeyed?
First we have to assume some gradation of the sand. A width (dss/dis) of 2 is quite normal
(always check!), giving e.g. dis ~ 0.3 mm and dss = 0.6 mm. The stability rule gives: disr <
5:-dase = 3mm and the permeability rule: disr > 5-dise = 1.5 mm. So, dis of the filter material
should lie between 1.5 and 3 mm. The internal stability rule, finally, says something about
the possible width of the gradation. A deo/d1o ratio of 10 is more or less equivalent with a
des/dis ratio of 12 - 15. So, fine gravel with a dis of 2mm and a dss of 10 mm will be suitable
(dso = 5 mm). A wider gradation (a dss of 20-25 mm is possible) can reduce the number of
filter layers.


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 133
6.2.3 Geometrically open filters
As mentioned in Section 6.2.1, the idea behind a geometrically open filter is that the
grains of the base layer can erode through the filter layer, but that the occurring
gradient is below the critical value. Via the Forchheimer equation, see chapter 5, the
gradient is related to the velocity in the filter, which is again related to the forces acting
on a grain. When the loading forces on a grain of the base layer are smaller than the
resisting forces, there will be no erosion. Although the flow through a granular filter
can be in any direction, it is advantageous for design and research purposes, to discern
the two main directions: perpendicular and parallel, see Figure 6-5. The critical
gradient in the case of parallel flow is defined in the filter layer and with perpendicular
flow in the base layer, which is also related to a different erosion mechanism.

ay
OCR OguRCtES
oh S =, A,
base ti, base — ig
I<<lp 0 Qe =p le=lg Qe 7? Ae
Figure 6-5 Perpendicular and parallel flow in granular filter

When the water flows parallel to the interface, the gradient in both layers is about the
same, causing the flow velocity in the filter layer to be much higher than in the base
layer, due to the greater permeability. At the interface a velocity gradient will exist,
inducing a (shear) stress on the upper grains in the base layer. The situation is very
much like incipient motion in an open channel and the critical shear stress, hence the
critical velocity, hence the critical gradient is defined in the filter layer. With
perpendicular flow, there is a serial system where-in the flow through base layer and
filter layer is equal, causing a much larger gradient in the base layer, because of the
larger permeability of the filter layer. Erosion of the base layer will take place due to
fluidization, hence the gradient in the base layer determines the stability.
Perpendicular flow
With flow perpendicular to an interface in a filter we have to take gravity into account.
When the base layer is on top of the filter layer and the flow is downward, the finer
grains will easily fall through the filter layer and it is therefore recommended to follow
the rules for geometrically closed filters. In the case of upward flow through a base
layer lying under a filter layer, there is always a lower limit for erosion: the fluidization
criterion, for which the gradient is about 1 or 100% which follows from the vertical
equilibrium, see Chapter 5. The upper limit, again, is a geometrically closed filter.


134____CINTRODUCTION TO BED, BANKAND SHORE PROTECTION

oo il S Gadi @® geometrically

Z 8 Ya 9 dew = 220 pm nosed

a i IN 1 dere = 460 pm
Dl || CONS
PS
ole |" TFT) ay mak © rors
1 2 3 4 +6 6 7 8
i / soe

Figure 6-6 Perpendicular flow through geometrically open filters (de Graauw, 1983)
Figure 6-6 shows the results of some tests (from de Graauw et al.,1983). The diameter
ratio on the horizontal axis is somewhat different from the one used in the stability
relation of Equation (6.1): instead of dssp, dsoz is now used and the porosity in the filter
layer is also taken into account. The relation between the two can be estimated:
assuming nr ~ 0.35-0.4 and dsos ~ 0.7-0.8-dsse gives: nr- disr/ dsoz = 0.35-0.4-disr/
(0.7-0.8-dgsz) ¥ 0.45-0.55*5 = 2.2-2.7 as an estimate for the geometrically closed limit,
area 1 in the figure. The lower limit is formed by fluidization (piping) in which case
the filter grains are so large that the base acts as if there is no filter (area 3 in the figure).
In between, in area 2, several mechanisms play a role. Grains that flow from the base
layer into the filter layer, arrive in much larger pores with much lower flow velocities,
so the forces on such a grain decrease and it will not be transported further upward.
Another mechanism is arching, where bridges of fine grains block the filter, although
the geometrical criteria are not met. Note that the results are relatively more favourable
for finer grains.
Parallel flow
The stability of base material in a flow parallel to the interface of a filter can be seen
as the stability of a grain on the bottom of a very small channel. It is attractive to link
the Forchheimer equation with the threshold of movement as given by Shields, see
chapter 3, in order to establish a relation for the critical gradient in porous flow. This
approach was used by De Graauw et al. (1984) and resulted in an empirical relation.
The most important parameters appeared to be the diameter of the base material (as a
measure of the stability) and the diameter and porosity of the filter material (both as a
measure of the flow through the filter). The experimental results finally yielded:

5/3 /3
Ic |e. + 7F ASF aise Ja (6.2)
np dsr — 1000 dog

in which wis the critical shear velocity according to Shields. The parameters in this
dimensional equation are given in SI-units. The two terms in Equation (6.2) come from
the idea of a laminar and a turbulent part as found in the Forchheimer equation (the
first and the second term between the brackets, respectively).


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 135
1.0 ET TTF ace (rn): 15 0182 0.15 0.43
08 Saas Measured} > 4 O OF
06 TOK catuste ) @ @ @
alculated: (1) (2 @
oa 3 mos
3 IN
03-2 o>
iy le Oo
£ 1 LN
02 § Ni \\
04 Ness i.
tt RO EH
0.08 ————a <r e SSH
et See cat
a it Ny asec
— | S
0.04 tT x
ood CCH Na
1 2 3456 810 20 30 40 60 80100
ee ye / son
Figure 6-7 Critical parallel gradient for geometrically open filter layers
Figure 6-7 shows a comparison between some computed lines and the experiments.
Again, for a given ratio of nr disr / dsos, the critical gradient is seen to be greater for
fine base material than for coarse base material. This can be explained by the lower
filter velocities in fine pores: a relatively larger gradient is needed in the filter layer to
reach the critical velocity. With base material larger than about 5 mm, no further
reduction of the critical gradient occurs (compare the Shields parameter for large
grains in Chapter 3).
Note 1: When the filter is on a slope, w+,” in Equation (6.2) has to be corrected in the
same way as is done in open channel flow, with sin(¢— a) / sing, see Chapter 3.
Note 2: When there is a combination of perpendicular and parallel flow, the stability
rules for parallel flow can be used, provided the perpendicular gradient is < 0.5.
Example 6-2
Whats the critical parallel gradient of stone class 60-300 kg lying on stones of 40-125 mm?
Appendix A gives for 60-300 kg: Wis = 80 kg, So dnts ~ 0.315 m and dis ~ 0.37 m and for
45-125 mm: dso ~ 75 mm. use comes from the Shields relation using y=0.06 (see Chapter
3) giving: us? = Agdy = 1.65x9.81%0.075x0.06 = 0.073 (m/s). With ne = 0.4 and equation
6.2 this gives:
1<=[0.06/(0.4°x0.374*) + (0.4°°x0.37"°)/(1000x0.075%)] x 0.073
=(3.5+0.01) x 0.073 = 26%
Cyclic loading
Although stability in waves will not be treated before Chapter 8, the influence of cyclic
loading will be dealt with here, in order to complete the overall picture of filters.


136 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
In tests with parallel flow, for cycle periods > 2 s, the critical filter velocities and
gradients were found to be the same as for stationary flow, see De Graauw et al. (1984).
This confirms what was claimed in Chapter 5: the inertia term in the Forchheimer
equation appears to be of minor importance. So, for cyclic parallel flow in filters,
Equation (6.2) can be used to determine the critical gradient. The loading gradient in
parallel filters can be estimated roughly with wave equations, see Chapter 7.

8
o.fm | | ssc. S
© Pe | K — satoren KV

abg X— — cyclic [A i’ Tie

: aaeere
| oa SJ S| statignay Cero,
Paes ae,
o_ Yet eT TT Te] SS
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
arts aso
Figure 6-8 Filters in non-stationary flow

Cyclic perpendicular loading, see De Graauw et al. (1984), produced considerably dif-
ferent results compared with stationary tests, see Figure 6-8a. The critical gradient
appeared to be lower, for both fine and coarse sand. An explanation is offered by the
arches, see Figure 6-6, which can not build up or are destroyed during reversed flow.
For coarse sand there appeared to be a critical gradient of about 200% inside the
geometrically closed region. For a permeable dike toe, one does not have to worry
about a geometrically closed filter drain. In case of heavy dynamic loading, e.g.
"rocking" of an offshore structure on a filter foundation, specific hydraulic and soil
mechanic research should be carried out.
For the transition between an armour layer and a first filter layer in breakwaters,
relations like Wr / Wz < 10 - 15 are often mentioned in manuals. With W « d° this
comes down to dr / dg < 2.2 - 2.5, which is a much heavier demand than the
geometrically closed criteria (with a width ratio dgs/dis ~ 2 and the stability rule
disr/dgsp <5, dsor/dsor < 10). The relations between diameters in geometrically closed
filters are such that the grains can not move inside the filter, so this should also be
good enough in non-stationary conditions. This is indeed the case: only in very heavy
cyclic loading perpendicular to the interface, the geometrical limits are sometimes
exceeded, see Figure 6-8a. The strictest demands on breakwaters are not dictated by
filter rules, but by mechanical considerations. Often, the individual elements in the
armour layer, see Figure 6-8b, are too large to be able to speak of a real layer. With
the geometrically closed rules, the surface would be too smooth to form a stable
foundation for the large elements. Another advantage of larger elements under the
armour layer, is that the wave energy can be absorbed better, leading to a more stable
armour layer, see Chapter 8. Even then, Wr / Wz < 10 - 15 seems very strict and there
are examples of ratios of more than 25 (dr / dg ¥ 3) which function satisfactory.


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 137
Note: One could worry about the permeability rule when larger elements are applied
under the armour layer and djs¢/d\szg > 5 will clearly be violated. With such large
elements, usually with a narrow gradation, there is little chance of blocking the pores
as described in Intermezzo 6-1. Beside that, there will not be a large gradient pushing
the stones of the underlayer through the armourlayer.
Bed protections
Bed protections in rivers or behind outflows are a special case. The (parallel) gradient
in open channel flow is very small (order of magnitude I= 107 or less) and for a stable
filter, according to Equation (6.2) and Figure 6-7, the ratio between filter diameter and
base diameter could be very large. In this case, however, turbulence can penetrate into
the top layer and increase the average gradient at the interface, just as in open channel
flow.
Figure 6-9 shows tests carried out at Delft University of Technology (Van Os, 1998). A
caisson is placed in a flume with adjustable distance between the caisson and a filterbed
of stones (dso = 20 mm) on a sandbed (dso = 0.1 mm). Two filterbed thicknesses were
examined: 60 mm and 100 mm. If the caisson is placed directly on the filter (gap height
= 0), the critical gradient for motion at the interface between filter and sand is about 5.5%,
which is in line with Equation (6.2), There is hardly any influence of the filter thickness.
With increasing gap height, the velocity above the filterbed increases rapidly for a given
gradient, The critical gradient decreases with increasing gap height. The thickness of the
filter clearly plays a role in the value of the critical gradient. A thicker filter gives a larger
ctitical gradient, which is to be expected. Example: a 7 cm gap gives a critical gradient
of 2.8 % for a filter of 60 mm and 3.7 % for a 100 mm thick filter.
26 T ;
“e] asso Sel | TT
A Ie
— i pte ttl as
Cen gi |_| :
ae weioalee
® Gap height om) 1 Zz a fas
oman ee
0 0.2 04 06 08 1.0 1.2
——> velocity in gap (mis)
Figure 6-9 Tests with flow over bottom protection with filter
Turbulent velocities have been measured inside the pores of the filterbed and analysed. It
appears that velocity and turbulence diminish rapidly inside the filter, but remain constant
at levels lower than 1.5dso inside the filter. From this one could conclude that a thicker
filter is not a better protection against erosion (due to the decrease of the turbulent
velocities inside the filter!). However, practice has shown that open filters have to be
thicker than 1.5dso. The explanation has to be found in the longer path for the sand


138 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
through the filterbed. Theoretical considerations and analysis of the velocity signal has
led to the thesis that fluctuations with a high frequency are responsible for incipient
motion of the sand grains. Fluctuations with a low frequency transport the grains through
the filterbed. A larger gap allows larger eddies in the current above the filter, leading to a
lower critical gradient. In a thicker filter, a sand grain needs more powerful eddies to be
transported to the surface of the filter, hence a larger critical gradient.
For provisional application, Wérman,1989, can be used:

dsr _ (Io"r) Ap _D_ (63)

dysp np Ap dsor
in which D is the thickness of the top layer. For materials with the same density and a
normal porosity this leads to disr/ dgsg = 8 - 10 x D/dsor, which with a minimum value
of D/ dsor = 2 — 3, gives about 3 - 6 times more favourable ratios than the rules for
geometrically closed filters, When D becomes very large, it is recommended to use the
relation of Equation (6.2) as a lower limit.
Note: Always check whether there is a parallel gradient active at the interface, also in
open channel flow. E.g. under or near a groyne or pier, the accelerations and pressure
differences can give considerable gradients!

2 2

L i

° ————— ——————

Fi P

2 2

3 2

“ 4
Wofso * :

2 ©

a 7

* 2

0 of 02 03 04 05 06 o 01 02 03 04 05 06
Ugg lly TMS(Ugq)/Ue
Figure 6-10 Velocities in an artificial pore; on the left the fluctuation in the pore (adjusted
from Detert et.al, 2007)

Research by Detert (2007) proved that the velocity in the pores indeed reduces quite
fast. In Figure 6-10 measurements of the real velocity in a pore are presented as the
depth under the interface (y). Not only the velocity goes back to only 10% of u« at a
depth of 8 do, but even more relevant, also the turbulent fluctuations decrease
considerably.


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 139
6.3 Geotextiles
6.3.1 Introduction
“Geotextile’ is a generic term for all kinds of foil- and cloth-like synthetic materials
which are becoming increasingly important in civil engineering. They are used to
armour soil in foundations and slopes, as membranes to prevent seepage or to protect
the environment against pollution from a dump area, and as filters in hydraulic
engineering. The latter use is the subject of this section. Geotextiles come in many
shapes, depending on the production technique. The two main types are woven and
non-woven, see annex A. A disadvantage of geotextiles is that they may weather e.g.
as a result of ultra-violet light and that they are susceptible to wear and tear by
chemical, biological or mechanical processes. These aspects are beyond the scope of
this book. For an extensive treatment of geotextiles the reader is referred to Van
Santvoord (1994) and PIANC-MarCom report 113 (2011).
100
85 armour
layer
15
0 12345
ee =——-———-——— a
s 3 fi layer
#/ fF 4 in situ soil
i ala (i i 14s
———> “diameter oe
Figure 6-11 Possible effectiveness of geotextile in filter: sieve curves and situation
Geotextiles are considered to be a breakthrough in filter design, both in cost
effectiveness for large projects and in possibilities to design a sandtight filter with a
limited thickness, see Figure 6-11. They are especially useful in cases where there is
no space for a granular filter consisting of many layers or where it is difficult to
construct such a filter, The geotextile in this figure is completely responsible for the
filter function. The main functions of the layer between the top or armour layer and
the geotextile are to prevent damage to the geotextile by individual large stones and to
prevent flapping of the cloth, which can cause loss of the base material.
As for granular filters, the two main items are retention (stability and sandtightness)
and permeability, but several additional considerations are required for proper design
of geotextile filters.
The criteria for geotextile filter selection are in short as follows:
© aretention criterion to ensure that the geotextile openings are small enough to
prevent excessive migration of soil particles;
© a permeability criterion to ensure that the geotextile is permeable enough to
allow water to pass through it without significant impedance;


140 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

* an anti-clogging criterion to ensure that the geotextile has enough openings so
that the soil becomes entrapped within the geotextile and clogs a few openings,
the permeability of the filter will not be significantly impaired;

 asurvivability criterion to ensure that the geotextile survives its installation;

e a durability criterion to ensure that the geotextile is durable enough to
withstand adverse chemicals, ultraviolet light exposure and abrasive
environments for the design life of the project.

Another similarity is the existence of geometrically closed and open filters. Only
geometrically closed filters will be considered in this chapter. An item that can play a
role is the stability of a top layer on top of a geotextile on a slope. As for impervious
revetments, friction between the geotextile and the slope has to be checked.
Intermezzo 6-2 Improvisation
Improvisation should not play a very impor- When one of the tidal gaps was almost closed
tant role in a project of some quality. It would and the head difference across the dam was
indicate a lack of reflection on design and high, the caissons tilted due to piping. The
construction. Nevertheless, a situation may bottom was uneven and, as the mattresses did
arise where improvisation is inevitable, e.g. in not cover the bed completely, eroded due to
a remote area where material and equipment the strong currents. Torpedonets (other war-
is not always reliable, creativity of people on leftovers, curtains consisting of steel rings to
the spot is paramount. prevent submarines from entering a harbour)
were dumped into the holes and that solved
After the Second World War, the dike breach- the problem.
es in Walcheren, the Netherlands, were front [7-————————_
repaired with highly improvised filters. The -“ Th
dikes had been bombed to inundate the island | meal !
and the breaches were closed with caissons
and ships, both being leftovers from the war SS
fascine mattess =
in Normandy. The operation had to be *erasion
completed under high pressure and with cross
minimal means in the days just after the war. een
Mattresses were sunk to protect the bottom ~ | eK
against erosion and to function as a |
foundation for the caissons. > 2 _
erosion
6.3.2 Retention criteria
As for granular filters, the sandtightness depends on the relation between the pro-
portions of the base material and the holes in the filter textile. To characterize the
openings of the textile, a kind of reversed sieve test (according to EN12956) is
performed with appropriate sand. The particle size distribution of this sand is deter-
mined after washing through a single layer of the geotextile used as a sieve, without
load. The characteristic opening size corresponds to a specified size of the granular
material passed. So, sand is washed through a sample of geotextile in a standard
sieving machine. The distribution of the material passing through the geotextile is


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 141
determined, and for example the doo of the passed fraction determines the Oso of the
geotextile. In Figure 6-12a plot is given of the distribution of sand passing through a
specific geotextile. Only the tail of the distribution is given. The dots indicate the
measured weight-percentages of the fractions falling through the sieves. In this
example the Ooo becomes 0.225 mm.

Important numbers in sandtightness are Os, Qos and Oos, sometimes called Omax, a
measure for the largest holes in the textile. Note that, of course, the escape route is
now determined by the largest holes instead of the finest grains!
= 100
> cover
3 9 layer flow
© 90 = tau] smn ret
8 textile a
& 8 ee ray
2 woshed PPO Sha ee)

80 Orn out zone [ps i lar YS
8, Or an” | A) YY
§ in eee « as
5 70 com soil e@ .O9.S.9.| el

005-0102 ‘0512 ay MMP Gg
— “diameter (mm)
Figure 6-12 Definitions apertures geotextile and migration of fine particles
The most strict geometrical filter rule is that the smallest particles may not pass the
largest opening in the textile. This should be applied when the filter is cyclically loaded
and no loss of material is acceptable. In many situations, some loss of fine material is
not detrimental to the functioning of the filter, since a small layer under the textile can
act as part of the total filter system, see Figure 6-12B. The finer parts are washed
through the textile and the coarser particles act as a filter for the remaining soil,
provided the subsoil is internally stable, see also granular filters.
The stability rule for stationary flow through geometrically closed geotextiles is
simply:
Oo9 < 2+ doog (6.4)

For cyclically loaded geotextiles 2 to 4 times lower values for the apertures should be
used, depending on the permissibility of some sediment loss through the textile.
6.3.3. Permeability criteria
To prevent pressure build-up, a geotextile should be more permeable than the subsoil.
A simple rule is that the permeability, k, of the geotextile should be more than 10 times
larger than that of the subsoil. The permeability of a geotextile can be measured in the


142 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
same way as for soils, using Darcy-type relations, but to characterize the permeability
of geotextiles the permittivity parameter is often used, defined as follows:
u k
f
P= teak (6.5)
Ah e
in which Ah is the head difference, e is the thickness of the geotextile and & the
"normal" permeability coefficient. Pcan be seen as the permeability per m thickness
of geotextile and is a property of the material, regardless of the thickness of the
geotextile.
The following table gives an idea of the permittivity of some geotextiles:
Ovo (mm) P (is)
Mesh net 01-1 1 -5
Tape fabric 0.05 -0.6 01-1
Mat 02-1 0.05 -0.5
Non-woven 0.02 -0.2 0.01 -2
Usually, a geotextile is more permeable than the subsoil, but two phenomena can
decrease the permeability: blocking and clogging.
30
. — non-woven
gectextite 4 Nae i
~ 20 one Ho! feb
SSIES A ——— tape fabric
10 +
rrrrrtt | | See
ie ee eee
7 2 3 4 5 6 7
— 4/0,
Figure 6-13 Blocking of geotextile
Blocking occurs when large particles seal the openings in the textile. In that case, the
permeability can decrease dramatically as is shown in Figure 6-13, indicating results
of permeability tests for which a uniform base material was used (all grains were of
about the same size). When the diameter of the base material has the same order of
magnitude as the Oso, the head difference over the textile will increase by a factor 10-
20 (compared with the situation without grains). Note that not every type of textile is
equally sensitive to this phenomenon.
Clogging is the trapping of (very) fine particles in the openings of the textile, also
leading to a decrease of permeability. This can happen when water is contaminated
with chemicals, e.g. iron. In contrast to blocking, clogging is a time-dependent process.
The idea is that it stabilizes at a certain level after a certain time, but not much


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 143
experimental evidence is available to support this thesis. One should realize that
clogging does not occur exclusively in geotextiles; it also takes place in granular filters.
When the permeability of the textile is 10 times greater than that of the subsoil, there
is usually no significant pressure build-up, not even when clogging takes place.
However, when used in very contaminated groundwater, one should be very careful.
When the danger of blocking or clogging can be ruled out, a permeability ratio (with
the subsoil) of 2 or 3, is sufficient.

A better requirement would be to link the permeability or permittivity directly to the
absolute pressure build-up under the geotextile in order to prevent sliding along a
slope, see next section.
6.3.4 Overall stability
Basically the same forces are active as on an impervious layer, see Chapter 5. In Figure
6-14 a geotextile lies on a slope and is covered with a filter layer and a top layer.
x
=m \, a Wsina
aet\ Fr \
= P 2
Ah Ah Weosa
ad fe <j \ w Ww
aoc —getextile
Figure 6-14 Overall stability of filter with geotextile

To prevent the stone layers on the geotextile from sliding down the slope, friction is
needed between the filter layer and the geotextile. The amount of friction follows from:

Su W cosa => Wsina (6.6)
where fy is the friction factor between stones and geotextile, giving fu > tana, a
requirement which is usually met. W disappears from the equation after dividing, so
this requirement is valid for a protection above or under water.
The equilibrium demand for the whole protection, including geotextile, on the slope
reads:

fe | (Pnere )&d Axcos.a—pyg AhAx|+ Fr = (Pnere)gddxsina (6.7)
in which pnerr is the effective density of the layer as a whole. Above water, with


144 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
ps = 2650 kg/m? and porosity n ~ 0.4, this is equal to (1-n) ps ~ 1600 kg/m?. Under
water this has to be reduced by py, giving Pnerr = (1-n)(~s— Pw) = 1000 kg/m.
Ah is the pressure difference across the geotextile, expressed in m water, which can be
neglected in most cases, but has to be checked when the permittivity (see Equation
(6.5) is very low, e.g. by clogging. Fr is the tension force in the geotextile (support
from the toe is neglected since a geotextile can not develop a pressure force). Fr can
be determined by estimating fz, the friction factor between geotextile and subsoil,
which is usually in the range (0.6 - 0.9)tang. Low water determines the maximum
tension force, since the uplift effect from the water (Archimedes) is then minimal and
the maximum unsubmerged weight "hangs".
6.3.5 Survivability and durability
Special attention should be paid to the execution (especially under water). In case of
geotextiles the damage due to placing of cover layers should be avoided. For this
reason the drop height during dumping of stones normally should be restricted to 0.5
m. Higher drop heights are only acceptable when supported by special tests for specific
geotextiles with a maximum equal to 2 m. An alternative is to cover the geotextile with
a protective layer of gravel.
Geotextiles have become quite durable, especially when applied under water and/or in
soils (i.e. no UV radiation present, and with a constant, relatively low temperature and
normal acidity of the soil). Prototype tests, as well as some accelerated ageing tests
show that even after a century geotextiles can still work well. The strength is somewhat
reduced, in the order of 85% of the original strength.
6.4 Summary
Filters can have two functions: preventing erosion under a top layer or drainage to
prevent pressure build-up. In both cases filter stability and permeability play a role.
Stability concerns the grains that should remain stable in the filter, while the
permeability is important to avoid pressure build-up, which can cause instability of a
layer as a whole. The two main types of filters are granular filters and geotextiles.
Granular filters fall into two categories: geometrically closed and geometrically open.
Geometrically closed filters are stable, regardless of the porous flow through the filter.
In fact there is no critical gradient because the relation between the diameters in the
filter is such that the finer grains cannot move through the pores of the coarser grains.
Geometrically closed filters have to be designed within the margins of stability and
permeability. The design rule consists of three inseparable parts:

Stability: aise <5 IntStability: doo <10 Permeability: aise >5

dgsp dy asp


6. POROUS FLOW - FILTERS 145
Stable geometrically open filters have a critical gradient, above which the base
material is no longer stable. As for open-channel flow, the occurring gradient needs
to remain below the critical value. This means that both these gradients have to be
known. Section 6.2.3 treats the critical gradients for flow perpendicular and parallel
to the interface of the layers. The occurring gradient has to be derived from
calculations or measurements inside the filter in a test facility. In bottom protections
with a low gradient but high turbulence, the thickness of the layers becomes important,
which is expressed in Equation (6.3).
Geotextiles can replace several filter layers, resulting in a thinner filter. A simple rule
Jor stationary flow is: Qyy < 2+ doop- For cyclic flow, the apertures should be 2 to 4
times smaller, depending on the permissibility of sediment loss.
The permeability of a geotextile is usually expressed as the permittivity, which is
defined as the permeability per m thickness of geotextile. The permeability of a
geotextile can be reduced by blocking (sudden) or clogging (a gradual closure of the
holes in the textile). With a permeability 10 times larger than that of the subsoil, the
permeability is usually enough to prevent pressure build-up. On slopes it may be
necessary to check the stability of the entire combination of filter layers and
geotextiles. The friction between geotextile and the top layers or subsoil has to be
sufficient and/or the geotextile has to be strong enough to withstand any possible
tension forces.




7 WAVES - Loads
us
ev
ee
Goes Muh
—_— = Sees
——~< eee = SS
———S
Seer as me nex & ik
Wave loads during Coastal Engineering Fieldwork in Bulgaria (photo H.J. Verhagen)


148 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
7.1 Introduction
A "wave" is the generic term for any (periodic) fluctuation in water height, velocity or
pressure. This chapter will be restricted to wind-generated waves. The term sea is often
used for "fresh" waves, where the driving wind force is still active, in contrast to swell.
Swell is the name for waves that were caused by wind, but possibly long ago (days)
and far away on the ocean (thousands of km). Sea is typically short-crested and
irregular, while swell waves typically are more regular with long periods and wide
crests.
(6
—______
1. wave generation 3. wave statistics
Ee
Figure 7-1 Wave aspects
The technical treatment of (wind) waves can be divided roughly into three categories,
see Figure 7-1:
1. Generation
The generation of waves by wind is described with relations of the type:
HL, Teharacteristic = f (thwina, A, fetch). When for a coastal project no measured wave
data and no advanced software to predict waves are available, Appendix 7.7.3
gives some useful relations for a first estimate. See also SPM,1984.
2. Hydrodynamics
Velocities and forces in waves are, of course, important when dealing with
erosion and protection. These parameters are described with relations of the
type: u, p, T= f(H,T.A). The wave generating forces no longer play a central
role, the starting point is now wave height and period. Phenomena like
refraction and diffraction, also being part of wave hydrodynamics, are beyond
the scope of this book.
3. Statistics
The water surface of wind waves is irregular because the driving force, the
wind, is turbulent. It is therefore necessary to characterize a wave field by
means of statistical parameters, Relations of the type: p(H) =f (Heharacteristc
distribution function) give the probability of a certain wave height in a wave
field. Wave spectra have become the most important description of the joint
distribution of wave heights and periods in wave fields.


7. WAVES - LOADS 149
These three issues in wave description each have their own clear-cut function and
sometimes lead to confusion. Hydrodynamics is not limited to regular waves, although
most relations have been formulated for periodical fluctuations. Wave statistics of
irregular waves do not replace hydrodynamics, but are only a mathematical tool to
describe the fluctuations of the water surface. For any individual wave in an irregular
wave field, forces can be derived from hydrodynamical relations, while the statistics
give the probability of occurence of those forces.
Appendix 7.7.2 gives some information on wave statistics. Here, it is sufficient to say
that a wave field is usually characterized by the significant wave height, H,, and the
peak period, 7;. H; is defined as the average height of the highest third part of the
waves in a wave field, while 7) is the peak period of the wave spectrum, the period
with the maximum energy density. Hs, in combination with the Rayleigh distribution,
characterizes the state of the sea at a certain moment. This state of the sea can change
every hour or so, giving different values for H,, which also has a distribution in time,
the so-called long-term distribution. For maintenance and design considerations, this
long term distribution is important in the choice of representative loading conditions.

= = _—impact
RS quite gat“ SS
— : _ oes
yolore
velocity
Figure 7-2 Examples of wave loads

Figure 7-2 shows how waves can load protections. Starting point is a given wave near
the location to be considered, Interaction between the waves and the structure plays an
important role. Figure 7-2a gives a vertical wall, which is reflecting a progressive
wave, resulting in a standing wave, with pressure fluctuations against the wall and a
load on the bottom due to velocities in the wave. Figure 7-2b shows a breaking wave
on a mild slope, a so-called bore, which is very much like a hydraulic jump. Due to
the breaking, the motion in the wave becomes very turbulent. The wave in Figure 7-2c,
breaks on a steeper slope, causing steep pressure gradients and possibly impacts due
to collisions between protection and waves.
7.2 Non-breaking waves
7.2.1 General
Wind waves in deep water are, from a hydrodynamic point of view short waves. That
means waves where vertical accelerations can not be neglected. In long waves, that
exist in tides, storm surges, tsunamis and river floods, the negligible vertical


150 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
accelerations make the pressure distribution hydrostatic. Waves in shallow water,
especially swell, can be seen as a transition from short to long waves.
at ’ celerity ee a

' : h hydrostatic ' orbital!

' H : Pressure + motion!

' : ' dyrtamic i :

' ' H juctation ‘ :

OQ io) velocity
lM GQ G&G) GQ  ecxeration

Figure 7-3 Wave motion in periodic, unbroken wave at a fixed time instant
Figure 7-3 shows the main characteristics of pressures and velocities in a progressive,
periodic, unbroken sine-wave at a certain time. The pressures deviate from the
hydrostatic values, due to the vertical accelerations. The particle velocities are related
to the orbital motion. In general these are ellipses, in deep water they are circles and
at the bottom they are straight lines. One has to bear in mind, that a wave has two
velocities: the celerity or propagation speed, which is the speed of the wave shape, and
the particle velocity. A clear demonstration of the difference between these velocities
can be seen during sporting events, when people just rise and sit down again, while
"The Wave" travels through the crowd.
Water in motion can be fully described by the Navier-Stokes equations, but, in
different situations, different terms can be neglected. In open-channel flow, friction
has an important influence on the flow and the thickness of the boundary layer is more
or less equal to the water depth. The loads by long waves on protections can be seen
as a succession of more or less stationary flow situations, which have been treated in
Chapter 2. Nowadays, pressures (water levels) and velocities of long waves, are easily
computed numerically for long periods at many locations. A numerical solution for a
complete irregular wave field, is still not possible for practical reasons, mainly due to
the large number of calculation points in time and space, although techniques do
improve rapidly. Fortunately, however, the fluid motion in short waves, excluding a
thin boundary layer (see next section), can be described as irrotational. Given the shape
of the wave, this makes analytical solutions for pressures and velocities in a wave
possible.


7. WAVES - LOADS 151
A different wave shape gives different relations for the water motion in the waves.
Figure 7-4 gives an overview of the validity of various wave theories, based on various
wave shapes, adapted from LeMéhauté, 1976. The horizontal axis represents the water
depth, made dimensionless with the acceleration of gravity and the square of the wave
period, which is a measure of the wavelength. The vertical axis represents the wave
height, again made dimensionless with the wavelength. The vertical axis is therefore a
measure of the wave steepness ( H/L) and the horizontal axis a measure of the relative
waterdepth (o h/L). Upwards, the validity (or better: the very existence of waves) is
limited by breaking due to steepness and to the left by breaking due to restricted water
depth, see Section 7.3.1.
0.05
di ae
|| Miche breaking limit (H/L = 0.142)
0.02) ea
x
oo tL | FT idawtey
“ret Lil ay TT]
9.005 SZ NON-BREAKING
| | | 1 KK 2nd order theory
0.002 ' ce / A
Peay
0.001 { = 1
SA) a
0.0005 0.001 0.002 0.005 0.01 0.02 005 O1 02 05
—- sig’
Figure 7-4 Validity of wave theories (LeMéhauté, 1976)
The shape of waves with increasing steepness in deep water (upper right corner in
Figure 7-4) has to be described with more sine components, leading to more complex
solutions of the equation of motion. Waves with considerable wave height in shallow
water, can be described with the cnoidal wave theory and, on the verge of breaking,
with the solitary wave theory. Here only the linear or first-order wave theory will be
used, in which the shape of the wave is a simple sine. In Appendix 7.7.1, an overview
of the formulae in this theory is given. According to Figure 7-4, this theory may only
be applied with relatively small waves in deep water (another name for this theory is
the small-amplitude wave theory). The approximation of waves by a simple sine
function is a crude simplification. For an adequate understanding, however, the linear
theory is very useful and attractive, since it gives a simple, but complete description
of the pressure and velocity field. Calculated values outside the range of validity can
serve as a first indication.


152 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
05
i | | fe
£041 0 s=1%
—
= PRE eT
B 03+ V s=6% wo
g nv
bottom velocities Zo Lo
ge Te TT
1:25 017—s
)
o Of 02 03 04 O05
—— > Computed (mis)
Figure 7-5 Application linear wave theory
Figure 7-5 gives an example of the application of the linear wave theory on a mild
slope, outside the limits of validity (from Schiereck et al, 1994). With (regular) wave
heights of 0.2 - 0.3 m, water depths of 0.4 - 0.6 m and a wave steepness (defined as s
= HIL) ranging from 0.01 - 0.05, the values of H/g7? are in the range 0.002 - 0.008
and those of h/g7? in the range 0.004 - 0.02, which is far outside the permissible range
in Figure 7-4. Despite that, the similarity between measured and computed values is
remarkably good. So, in many cases, the linear theory can be used for a first estimate
of maximum bottom velocities, which are quite important for bottom protections.
Note: This is not true for parameters such as the surface profile and the surface
velocity, see also LeMéhauté, 1969.
H=7.5 * location pressure
T=15 sn measurement
0 O22 peccooecothadiecadeteass
‘\ t \ -
SLL fHFE 7
SS = “7
On age Nee
300K9\. 10 reeeatS SRS esr
coarse
uf) gravel
Figure 7-6 Gradient in filter under breakwater
An even more amazing example of the value of the linear wave theory is shown in
Figure 7-6. The pressures in the transition between coarse and fine filter layers under
the Hook of Holland breakwater (Port of Rotterdam) have been measured in a
laboratory model, from which the gradient was determined. This is a porous flow
situation for which the Forchheimer relation (see Chapter 5) should be applied.
Assuming that the coarse grains do not influence the pressure gradient near the bottom
and using the linear wave theory to calculate the pressure gradient at the bottom gives
(expressed in piezometric gradient, see Table 7.1 in Appendix 7.7.1):


7. WAVES - LOADS 153
a p@ =—h) 2 H (ot | kH
= 2P@aT)_ ey - > imax = =—
= Ox pg ax | Deosh(khy 6! ~ “) | > max = Zcoshckh)
(7.1)

For a waterdepth h = 10 m, a wave H = 5 mand T= 10s this gives: fnax ¥ 0.14
(measured 0.18) and for H = 7.5 mand T= 15 8: inax ¥ 0.15 (measured 0.22). The
higher gradients that were measured can be explained by the fact that near the
breakwater the nearly breaking waves have a steeper front, such that the pressure
gradient is higher. For a detailed design of a large breakwater this is certainly not
accurate enough, but for a preliminary design, it gives an order of magnitude.
7.2.2 Shear stress
Chapter 2 showed that in wall flow without a fully developed boundary layer, the shear
stress is higher than in uniform flow due to accelerations. In waves, a similar
phenomenon occurs, but the accelerations are local: varying in time but not in place.
In that case the growth of the boundary layer is approximated by, see Uijttewaal, 2003:

ds

So cue ~0.AUe (72)

dr
cis the von Karman constant and 1+ is the shear velocity which is much smaller than
the "driving" velocity of the orbital motion at the edge of the boundary layer u,
(w+ 0.lus). In a wave the boundary layer can only grow during half the wave period
and has to start from scratch again when the flow reverses. With 7'= 5 s and up = |
nis, this gives 5~ 0.1 m. In this boundary layer, the flow is highly rotational and the
assumptions on which the linear wave theory is based is not valid. The boundary layer
is, however, small compared with normal water depths, see Figure 7-7, so the wave
equations can be used for the greatest part of the water depth. This thin boundary layer,
however, is responsible for a high shear stress under short waves.
Ina tidal wave with w= 1 m/s and 7'~ 45000 s, the same approach shows that it takes
5 - 10 minutes for the boundary layer to grow as large as the waterdepth. So, the
assumption that tidal flow can be seen as a succession of quasi-stationary flow
situations is realistic when we look at bottom shear, which is important for bed
protections.


154 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
10°
03
irotational Measurements
z| flow 10'
| ' a
107-——+ —
rater yp c= exp [-6.0 + 5.2 (a,/k)°"]
Pal = +5
10°
—_ u 10° 10° 10? 10° 10°
—~ alk,
Figure 7-7 Friction under waves
In short waves the boundary layer never grows to the order of magnitude of the water
depth, hence high friction factors can be expected. The friction factor for a wave is
defined as for flow:
* 1 a2 . ~ aa ne
ty=—pcyts = with =@a, =———_ and uw, =i, sin(@t) (7.3)
w PEF sinh (kh) (#)
where the subscript w stands for wave and b for bottom. The average value of the shear
stress over a wave period is half the value of the maximum (the average of sin(@ f) is
1/2). Jonsson, 1966, found an expression for turbulent flow over a rough bed based on
experiments, it was rewritten in a more practical form by Swart, see Rock Manual
(CiRIA, CUR, CETMEF, 2007):
0.52
a,
cy -02m{ 2) for ay >0.636k, [or C7max =0.3 ] (CE)
a
Comparing the values in Figure 7-7 with those for flow, one can notice that shear stress
under short waves can be much higher than in flow. cy in uniform flow is g/C? (see
chapter 2) which results in values of (O) 0.01, while in very short waves, where the
amplitude at the bottom has the same order of magnitude as the roughness, values of
0.1-0.3 seem possible. 0.3 is usually considered the maximum value.
Example 7-1
What is the shear stress under a wave, 3 m high with a period of 7 s, in a waterdepth of
8 m and with a bottom roughness of 0.1 m?
The wave length in 8 m deep water becomes 55.2 m (found iteratively from Table 7.1 or
from Figure 7-24). k then becomes 27/L = 0.114 and w= 21/T = 0.898. ao= %H/ sinh(kh)
= 1.44 mand Ubmax = @ay = 1.29 m/s. cr then becomes 0.237(1.44/0.1)°52 = 0.059. The
shear stress is then: 4 - 1000 - 0.059 - 1.29? = 49.3 Nim?.


7. WAVES - LOADS 155
Waves and currents
In most cases, both waves and flow will be present. When waves are dominant, the
approach mentioned above is recommended, but when flow is dominant, according to
Bijker,1967, the influence of waves can be taken into account by adding the current
and orbital velocity vectorially. In this approach effectively the shear velocities due to
waves and current are added. These stresses are:
‘9 G
Use = V9, and uy = [Ee sin(wt) (7.5)
Cc 2
in which a is the maximum orbital velocity at the bottom (note that here ws is Wscurrent
and not t*criicai). The resulting shear velocity at the bed wr is:
g iG
Use = Ig + Laz sin2(wt) + 2 Wf fy sin(wt) sin(p) (7-6)
eta c Mey2
where gis the angle between wave and current direction. The resulting shear is:

Ty = Psy? (7.7)
According to Equation (7.6) the resulting shear stress is maximum when the wave
direction is parallel to the flow (¢= 90°, see Figure 7-8). Note: For sediment transport,
Equation (7.6) is averaged over a wave cycle. The third term then vanishes and the
resulting shear becomes independent of ¢. For bottom protections, the maximum value
determines incipient motion.

waves max u, 100;
é cbrent L en Sy, E t sa
4 © 60 an pt
max u LA 25 i. S ro
> u 17 * (only®, a \
amt [7 wave) IANS
9 4 s
oN? Setes®
t (only current)
Figure 7-8 Combined wave-current action
Figure 7-8 shows the results of Equation (7.7) for the wave used in Example 7-1 (H7=
3m, T=7s, uy = 1.29 m/s and c¢= 0.059) with a current of 1 m/s and a Chezy value
of 50 Vm/s. The shear stress only due to the current is 4 N/m2, only due to waves it is
47.4 Nim? (as in Example 7-1). Waves perpendicular to the current (¢= 0) give a shear
stress equal to the sum of both (51.4 N/m2). Waves in the direction of the current ( =
90°), give a maximum shear stress of 78.6 N/m?.


156 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
7.3. Breaking waves
7.3.1 General
‘A wave breaks as a result of instability which develops when the wave can no longer
exist. When the particle velocity « exceeds the celerity c, the particles "leave the wave
profile”. This instability (with air entrainment) makes the flow highly complex and the
problem hardly lends itself to computation. Breaking occurs because a wave is very
steep (on deep water) or because the water is very shallow or a combination of these
reasons, Both limits are described with the breaking criterion by Miche:
Qn

H,, =0.142 L tanh zh (7.8)
For deep water, this simply becomes: Hs/L = 0.142 (h/L > 0.5 — tanh(2z hiL) = 1).
This is the maximum possible steepness for an individual wave. For H, in irregular
waves, about half this value is found, since Himax in irregular waves is about 2H, see
the Rayleigh distribution in Appendix 7.7.2. In practice, the steepness, Hs/Lop (deep
water wavelength related to the peak period), in a sea (fresh wind waves) is seldom
more than 0.05. For swell, much lower values occur: 0.01 or less. For shallow water,
equation (7.8) leads to Hs/h = 0.88 (h/L < 0.1 — tanh(2zh/L) = 27 hiL). The solitary-
wave theory leads to a slightly different limit: Hs/h = 0.78. Applied to Hs, this results
in a maximum value of Hy/h = 0.4 - 0.5, corresponding with the breaking of the larger
waves (1.5 - 2 H,). If there is a shallow foreshore and no wave measurements or
computations are available, this ratio is convenient to give a rough estimate of the
design waves. See also Section 7.3.2.
Breaker types
For waves breaking on a slope, the dimensionless Iribarren number or surf similarity
parameter is of crucial importance in all kinds of problems in shore protection. The
parameter is defined as (Battjes, 1974):

tana@

g = (7.9)

° [HL
where @is the angle of the slope. V(#/Lo) can be seen as the wave steepness (a rough
approximation, because H is the local wave height and Lo is the deep-water wave-
length). £ represents the ratio of slope steepness and wave steepness. Lo represents the
influence of the wave period, since Lo = g7?/2z. In irregular waves, Hs and Lop are
normally used in Equation (7.9).


7. WAVES - LOADS 157
H Sr
“Sx SWL
@
§=tana/VAJL,
Collapsing, & = 3 Plunging, € = 1.5
———————-——(itétC ee es
Plunging, € = 0.5 Spilling, & = 0.2
Figure 7-9 Breaker types

For different values of &, waves break in a completely different way. Figure 7-9 shows
the various types. The transition between breaking and non-breaking lies around =
2.5 - 3. For higher values the wave surges up and down the slope with minor air
entrainment. The behaviour of the waves from & ~ 3 to 5, is therefore often called
surging breaker although it can be questioned whether this is a breaking or a standing
wave. A collapsing breaker is between breaking and non-breaking. The most
“photogenic” breaker is of the plunging type (= 0.5 to 3). In plunging breakers the
crest becomes strongly asymmetric; it curls over, enclosing an air pocket and impinges
on the slope like a water jet. With decreasing slope angles, the crest of a plunging
breaker becomes less asymmetric and the water jet projected forward from the crest
becomes less and less pronounced. This leads to the spilling breaker type (é < 0.3).
The transition between the various breaker types is gradual and these values for é are
just an indication. For more detail, see Battjes, 1974. After breaking, the wave travels
on with a celerity equal to about V(gh) and the wave behaves like a bore or a moving
hydraulic jump, see Intermezzo 7.1. For more detail, see Fredsae, 1992.


158 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 7-1
bore hydraulic jump
—_ z/d,
d, t d,
0 1 2 3 4 5 60 1 2 3 4 5
(u-)Uy-0) _ ,
nipaonseaianl. @
0 1 2 3004 5 60 1 2 3 4 5
Ugly) ally
pet? [6 ble |
0 1 2 354 5 60 1 2 3, 4 s
This figure shows a comparison between city in the wave trough and the celerity of the
velocities and turbulence in a bore and a_ bore.
hydraulic jump (from Stive, 1984). The hy-
draulic jump data are from the same source as With this velocity difference, a Fr-number
the example in Chapter 2, but now Fr = 2. can be defined, 1.6 for the bore in this case.
The figure illustrates that the same pheno-
Velocities in the jump are related to the mena occur in breaking waves as in hydraulic
supercritical flow upstream of the jump (w;) jumps. However, no quantitative relations
and the distances are related to the down- between wave characteristics and turbulence
stream water depth (ds). To make the com- are available for stability rules for protections
parison, the velocities in the bore are related in breaking waves. Equation (7.10) is an
to the difference between the encounter velo__ approximation of the total energy loss.
The parameter £ indicates that, for a slope, the notions "steep" and "gentle" are relative.
A slope of 1:100 is usually thought to be very "gentle", but for a tidal wave it can be
just as steep as a vertical wall is for a wave with a period of a few seconds. This is
illustrated by the fact that a tidal wave on a beach does not break and is completely
reflected (the phenomena described in this paragraph are completely different from
those in tidal waves; the example only shows the relativity of all notions in
hydrodynamics). £also indicates that an incoming wave that is already very steep will
easily break, even ona steep slope.
Breaking also means energy transformation via turbulence and friction into heat.
Turbulence in wind waves has only been studied recently and much is yet unknown.
For flow we made a distinction between wall turbulence, e.g. induced by friction along
the bed, and free turbulence, e.g. in mixing layers. The same can be done for waves.
In non-broken waves, the only cause of turbulence is bed friction. In breaking and
broken waves much turbulent kinetic energy is produced by the friction between the
surface roller of the bore and the body of water moving with the wave. The total energy


7. WAVES - LOADS 159
loss in a bore can be approximately computed using the analogy with a hydraulic jump
with (see Battjes and Janssen, 1978):

Hw
D=pg— (7.10)
PS oTh
in J/(s-‘m?) where H, T and h are the wave height, the period and the water depth
respectively.
7.3.2 Waves on a foreshore
This book deals with the protection of banks and shores, so we could start with the
wave characteristics at the toe of the shore: a dike, a sea-wall or the like. But as
promised, the focus is on the understanding of processes rather than on formulas.
Waves travelling from deep water to a shore undergo all kinds of alterations, so it is
useful to know the history of waves arriving at the toe of a coast.
sea, estuary, lake, river foreshore shore
Perc SS eh OF
Figure 7-10 Waves on a foreshore
Of course, a wind blowing to the shore keeps transferring energy into the waves. But
for wave generation, fetch is also important, see Appendix 7.7.3; usually the wind can
be neglected when starting at the foreshore. As the introduction of this chapter states,
refraction will not be treated. The discussion will be limited to one-dimensional
processes going from deep to shallow water. The shoaling process causes the wave
height to increase and can be described with the linear wave theory. The bottom shear,
see Section 7.2.2, causes the wave height to decrease. Breaking completes the energy
transfer, since waves cannot go on in water of zero depth.
40 —_—a 12
CHEAP Soo
PTT el tts 4
a \ oo ee |
= =
(OTE SS
TAN ke
, ee ee
2 «18 12 8 4 0 Yo 6 6 4 2 °
——— waterdepth (m in relation to SWL) ————>_ waterdepth (m in relation to SWL)
Figure 7-11 Wave decrease on different slopes
Figure 7-11 shows some results of computation with SWAN, a numerical model for
wave propagation in shallow water (see Booij et al., 1999). A wave field with H,=4


160 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
m (defined as 4imo, see Appendix 7.7.2) and a peak period Tp = 8 s travels from a
depth of 20 m towards the shore. Two different slopes, 1:500 and 1:50, are used. Figure
7-L1a shows the decreasing wave heights for the two slopes. The difference is partly
due to friction and partly due to breaking.
(Note: the water depths are related to the original Still Water Level. Due to wave set-
up the water level rises near the shore leading to a wave height ¥ 0).
On a slope of 1:500 the waves travel a distance ten times longer and experience more
friction. The method of Battjes/Janssen, 1978, was implemented in SWAN for the
breaking of waves in shallow water. Based on the analogy between a bore and a
hydraulic jump the energy dissipation in this method is given by:
2
1, wf
D=!0,0¢ fm. AN)
goons T,
in which Hh is the maximum possible wave height, which is taken equal to the
breaking criterion given by Equation (7.8). Qs is the relative number of all (irregular)
waves that are broken and can be computed from:
2
1-9, --(4) (7.12)
InQ, Hy
indicating that, when the wave present at some location (represented by Hms) is higher
compared with Hn, there will be more breaking. This also shows that the
Battjes/Janssen-method contains a mixture of wave physics and wave statistics.
Figure 7-11b shows Q» and the wave height relative to the water depth (including the
wave set-up) on both slopes. On the 1:500 slope, it appears that wave breaking causes
an energy loss which is less important than friction. Only in the last stretch of the slope
breaking becomes important (1 m on the horizontal axis in Figure 7-11b represents
500 m for the 1:500 slope and 50 m for the 1:50 slope!) On the 1:50 slope, wave
breaking is already important from a depth of 5 m.
Figure 7-11b also shows that the relation H/h is not constant along the slope,
indicating that breaking takes time, hence distance. Breaker depths depend on the slope
angle, see also Section 7.3.2. But for a foreshore of some dimension, e.g. a sand bar
along the coast, a simple relation can be used for a preliminary design if'no wave data
are available:
H,~05h (7.13)


7. WAVES - LOADS 161
Wave height distribution and spectra
Breaking of waves on a shallow foreshore also causes deviations from the Rayleigh
distribution for wave heights. The larger waves break first as can be observed at any
beach. Battjes and Groenendijk, 2000, established a relatively easy procedure to create
an adapted wave-height distribution. Appendix 7.7.2 gives the outlines of this
approach. The shape of the wave spectrum will also change considerably on a shallow
foreshore.
7.4 Waves on slopes
7.4.1 General
As stated in Section 7.3.1, the surf similarity parameter, &, plays an important role in
the behaviour of waves on a slope. Reflection, breaker depth, wave run-up but also
stability of material on a slope can often be expressed as a function of &
Reflection
Vertical walls fully reflect incoming waves. Reflection is defined as the height of the
reflected wave in relation to the incoming wave height: Ke (reflection coefficient) =
HgJ/H;. It can be rationalised that Kz is proportional to 2, see Battjes, 1974.
Experimentally, Ke ~ 0.12 was found for values of below the breaking limit, see
Figure 7-12. For €> 2.5, Kr slowly tends to 1, the value for total reflection.
a || iil ils
Lae [* /
| AY | rr
0.25) || | | Gf || |
| aol
0.00 | le | | | |
0 0s 10 15 2.0 25 3.0 35 40
—<« §
Figure 7-12 Reflection as function of ¢ (Battjes, 1974)
Absorption
Energy that is not reflected or transmitted is absorbed on the slope and this absorption
is always at the expense of the protection. A low & means little reflection, see Figure
7-12, so, given a certain wave, a gentle slope (i.e. tan@ low) gives more absorption
which would imply an unfavourable loading situation for a protection. However, for
very gentle slopes the energy absorption is spread out over a larger area, such that the


162 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
energy absorption per m? is lower and the final result is therefore more favourable.
From Figure 7-13 it seems reasonable that the plunging breaker, which is common for
dikes and seawalls, forms a heavier load for a protection than the spilling type.
Another aspect of the heavy loading by plunging breakers is their jet-like behaviour.
A jet acts locally on the bed, doing much more harm than diffusing turbulence from a
surface roller. Stability relations show that collapsing breakers cause the most damage,
see the next chapter. This can possibly be explained by the fact that both surface roller
turbulence and a (beginning) jet act directly on the slope (no body of water between
roller or impinging jet and the bed to act as a buffer).
plunging breaker spilling breaker plunging jet
oN \
energy dissipation _
Figure 7-13 Energy dissipation for two breaker types
Breaker depth
For a horizontal bottom, the solitary-wave theory gives a relation between the wave
height and the waterdepth at which waves break: 7 = H/h ~ 0.78, while equation (7.8)
gives 7% = 0.88. For slopes, depends on & Figure 7-14 shows some experimental
results (using &) with the deep-water wave height Hp, since His hard to define at the
point of breaking).
2
+ ane
‘033 Miche
0.78" | a r | Sol. wave
ol |_|
0.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2
—+.,
Figure 7-14 Breaker depth as a function of &
There clearly is a relation with & for steeper slopes, the waves break at a smaller depth.
Apparently, the waves need time to break, during which they can travel to a smaller
depth. Compare also the difference between the two slopes in Figure 7-11b.


7. WAVES - LOADS 163
7.4.2. Run-up and run-down
Run-up regular waves
Run-up is defined as the maximum water level on a slope during a wave period and
the run-down is the minimum level (both relative to the still water level), see Figure
7-15.
x= R/H=E
S3
a smooth
swe Ru 2
_— Ry — rough
1
0
Oo 1 2 3 4 5
—, &
Figure 7-15 Run-up and run-down, definitions and run-up data
For breaking waves (€ <2.5-3) on smooth slopes, the Hunt’s formula gives:
Ry
Aw TA
We (7.14)
Rip-rap slopes give values which are about 50% lower, see also Figure 7-15. Run-up
appears to be maximum around & = 2.5-3, which means just at the transition between
breaking and non-breaking. For & —> oo the theoretical value is R,/H = 1 (standing
wave). So, the momentum of the wave motion on a slope leads to much higher levels.
Run-up irregular waves
Most wave run-up formulae for irregular waves use a value in the distribution that is
only exceeded by a small number of the waves, because the considered slope is usually
meant to protect something (not too much water should pass the slope). In The
Netherlands, Ryo», is used for the design of sea dikes. Ongoing research in physical
models and prototype has resulted in a number of successive formulae. In recent years
especially attention has been paid to shallow foreshores and wide (and double-peaked)
spectra. All research has been summarised in the EurOtop Manual (Pullen et al, 2007),
and Figure 7-16:
Rua _ {165 z 4-25 15)
= miny 1.65 yeyy¥p§m-10» ¥¢¥e | 4- ———= .
Hmo V5m-10
As can be seen in Figure 7-16, this equation gives an average value compared to the
scatter in the measurement results. The deviation between these results and the


164 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
equation follows a normal distribution with a 7% relative standard deviation. So the
results for any real structure and storm are expected to exhibit (at least) the same
scatter. It is advised in the EurOtop manual to add (at least) one standard deviation to
the calculated runup to obtain a safe deterministic design.
For low values of &,.1.0 (roughly smaller than 2) the left-hand side of the “min”
statement is valid, for the other values the right hand side becomes the minimum. The
average values and the standard deviations should be used in probabilistic
computations, the design values in case of a deterministic calculation. The formula is
valid in the range 0.5 < yrEn-10 < 10.
For large &n-1.0, the run-up shows a maximum as is the case for regular waves, sce
Figure 7-15. Note: When the Rayleigh distribution for the 2% highest waves is applied
to the expression for regular waves, Equation (7.14), an expression similar to Equation
(7.15) is found with a factor 1.4 instead of 1.65.
4 T
Se es
3 a
Rowe | cone |_| est nsenrees cance) |
i a | | |
| ‘| Hoe} ||} J
°9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
—*
Figure 7-16 Wave run-up irregular waves
Correction factors
Roughness
The run-up formulae are for smooth slopes like asphalt of smooth concrete blocks (77=
1). For grass slopes, yis between 0.95 and 1, but for design purposes TAW (2002b)
recommends to use a value of 1. For a rubble slope is one layer of riprap a reduction
of = 0.7 is recommended, while for a double layer of y= 0.55 may be used.
Angle of attack
When the wave attack is not perpendicular to the slope (i.e. 8 # 0), a reduction factor
is applied. For long-crested waves, like swell or ship waves, yg = y(cos(B) (from the
energy flux, which is « H? cosf) with a minimum of 0.7. For short-crested waves
(wind waves, which are not unidirectional like swell): ys = 1 — 0.0022/ (Bin degrees)
with a minimum of 0.8. For |f|>80° the result for |B|=80° should be applied.
Berm
A “berm” reduces the wave run-up. Figure 7-17 gives the parameters which play a role
in the berm reduction factor, yg. At both sides of the berm, the slope is intersected at a


7. WAVES - LOADS 165
vertical distance H; from the horizontal centre plane of the berm, giving a length Ls.
hg is the distance between SWL and the berm level (can be negative or positive). 7
finally becomes:

B, h
yp =1-—2| 0.5+0.5cos| 7%
Lp x
X= zy, for 29%, >—hg >0 (berm above SWL) (7.16)
X= 2H, for 2H no >hg 20 (berm below SWL)
with limits: 0.6 < yz <1 and -1 < hy/H, < 1. Equation (7.16) shows that a berm on
SWL is most efficient. For more information, see the European Overtopping Manual
(Eurotop, Pullen ef al, 2007, Equation (5.29)).
By
SWL « H,
L257 Sa Oe =e ee
H,
Us |
!
Figure 7-17 Definitions berm reduction
Foreshore
On very shallow foreshores wave break; the wave spectrum transforms and is
flattened. Also the waves are no longer Rayleigh distributed. According to Eurotop
one should use for the calculation of € not the Tino, but the 7-10, which is m-1/mo (the
first negative moment of the spectrum divided by the zeroest moment of the
spectrum). In case no detailed spectrum information is available, one may use J) =
1.17.19. For the wave height on the shallow foreshore one should use the Ho on the
foreshore.
Example 7-2
A grass dike with slopes 1:3 and a 2 m berm at design level is attacked by perpendicular
(swell) waves with Hs = 1 m and a steepness of 0.01. What is the wave run-up?
Starting point is Equation (7.14). = 1.0, ye is found from Equation (7.15). The berm height
is equal to the water level, so he = 0 and Ls = 2 Hscota+2=8 m, hence, ye = 0.75. ysis 1, we
do not assume a very shallow foreland. The surf similarity parameter is tana/0.1 = 3.33. The
wave run-up finally is then: Ruz = Hs x Min{1.65x0.75x1.0x1.0x3.33, 1.0x1.0(4.0-1.5/V3.33}
=1xMin{4.12, 3.17) = 3.17 m above design level. However, for a design different values for
the constants have to be used, so Ruz% = Hs x Min{1.75x1.0x0.75x1x3.33, 1.0«1.0(4.3-
1.6/V3.33}= 1xMin{4.40, 3.42) = 3.42 m.
Run-down regular waves
In Battjes,1974 the run-down is:


466__CINTRODUCTIONTOBED, BANKANDSHOREPROTECTION
Ry =R, (1-044) =H (1-04 2)E (7.17)
Figure 7-18 shows experimental results for run-down.
x1 a4
2 RYH = (1-0.48)6 ra
o _———— o
2 4 5 304 ~=5
4 ——>é 4 ——>§
jh
A = 2 smoot!
Figure 7-18 Run-down in regular (left) and irregular (right) waves
Run-down irregular waves
The run-down in irregular waves is (see Rock Manual, Ciria, Cur, Ceter (2007):
Ra rm =-0.33Hs Sp (Ra2% max = 1.5 Hs) (7.18)
Note: in irregular waves, the run-down is always below SWL.
No run-down reduction, due to roughness etc. is taken into account. The Rock Manual
gives more details.
7.4.3 Overtopping
In the past run-up was the most relevant parameter for the determination of the height
of a sea defence. However, after 1953 one realised that it is much more correct to
determine the height of a defence as a function of the quantity of overtopping water.
Because it is this quantity which determines the load on the inner slope (which is often
the weakest part of a dike) and it determines the amount of inconvenience by
overtopping water. At this moment the magnitude of overtopping is expressed in m?/s
or I/s per running meter, averaged over time. So this is not the instantaneous amount
of water flowing at a certain moment over a dike. The formulas given in this section
quantify the overflow in this way. However, recent research indicates that especially
for the stability of a grass cover the large overtopping quantities are much more
important than the small quantities, and that consequently the mean overtopping is not
a good descriptor. At the end of this section some attention is paid to this effect.
Quantifying overtopping
Detailed information of overtopping is given in the Eurotop manual (Pullen e7.al,
2007). The general description of the overtopping quantity is:
R
o=aere{-»4) (7.19)
Y


7. WAVES - LOADS 167
in which Q is the dimensionless overtopping and R the dimensionless freeboard:
o-—4 H,/ Ly
TV te

fens \ tana (7.20)
he 1
R=
As ¢

In case of non-breaking waves the root in the above formula should be set to 1. q is the

average overtopping in m?/s per meter crest and / is the crest height above the still

water level; h is the waterdepth.

In Equation (7.19) the coefficient y is for correction all kind of slope resistance; this

coefficient is identical to the y as used in Section 7.4.2 on run-up (except y= 0.0033 f).

The constants in Equation (7.19) are:

Po a ee
breaking (plunging) 0.067 4.75 05
non-breaking (surging) 0.2 2.6 0.35,

Therefore for design purposes b = 4.3 and b = 2.3 are recommended for the two types

of breaking wave, respectively.

For the allowable overtopping one may use the following values as a first estimate:

overtopping over (grass) dikes
low quality slope q< 0.1 Vsim
normal slope q<1.0Vsim
high quality slope q<10Vs/m
safe passage of driving cars q < 0.01 I/s/m
safe passage of pedestrians q < 0.1 I/s/m
no damage to buildings q<1Wsim
no sinking of small boats q<1to5 Vs/m

For breakwaters much higher values can be applied, usually then the amount of

overtopping is not relevant, but the amount of wave transmission.

For some applications it is also necessary to know the individual overtopping

quantities, ic. the overtopping per wave. The volumes of individual overtopping

waves are Weibull distributed. The probability of exceedance for a given overtopping
volume per overtopped wave Py is given by:
yo-75
Py = exp|— (-)
=e |-(~


168 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
q
a= 0.84T,, (7.21)
ov
N R. \
P,, =—“=exp [- ( In0.02 zr)
Nw Rua,
in which P.y is the exceedance probability of overtopping for any incoming wave, Nw
is the number of incoming waves, Now is the number of overtopping waves, and R. is
the crest freeboard. Hence the expected maximum wave for a certain number of
incoming waves can be obtainbed by rewriting the Weibul distribution in Eq. (7.21)
and taking the probably related to that of the highest of the overtopping waves (Py =
L/Now):
Vnax = a[In(Now)]/°7° (7.22)
Example 7-3
The probability distribution function for wave overtopping volumes per wave is calculated
for a smooth tana = 1:6 dike with a freeboard of Rc = 2.0 m, a period of the incoming wave
of Tm-1,0 = 5.0 s and a wave height of the incoming wave of Hmo of 2.0 m. For these
conditions, the wave run-up height is Ruex = 2.43 m, the average overtopping rate q = 1.7
I/s/m and the probability of overtopping per wave is Pov = 0.071. This means, that the scale
factor a becomes a = 0.100. The storm duration is assumed to be 1 hour, resulting in 720
incoming waves and 51 overtopping waves. The highest wave during this storm has an
exceedance probability of approx. 1/51= 2%. The volume of this wave is V=a(In(Now))# =
0.1 x (In (51))*? = 0.62 m*/m = 620 lim.
For damage to the inner slope (usual grass) it seems that not a single wave is relevant,
but some kind of cumulative load. A q = 1 I/s may be caused by small waves and by
big waves. In case of small waves there is more or less a continuous flow of 1 I/s, while
for big waves most of the time nothing happens, but occasionally there is a large
amount of overtopping. Therefore in this cumulative load larger overtopping quantities
are much more relevant than smaller overtopping quantities, even if the number of
events is small. One may reason that the damage should be a function of the square of
the velocity. The effect of load on grass seems to be something like a fatigue problem.
Therefore a new suggestion is to use a cumulative overload value:
Uover = d(x? =u?) (7.23)
in which w is the maximum velocity caused by each wave and 1 is the critical velocity
for causing damage to grass. From tests with the overtopping simulator it seems that
failure may occur for values of Upver> 3500 m2/s? per meter. However, this value will
depend on the quality of the grass cover. For good grass this value will be higher than
for low quality grass.


7. WAVES - LOADS 169
7.4.4 Wave impact
The pressure under a wave increases and decreases with the wave cycle as long as the
water keeps in touch with the point where the pressure is considered. This is often
called the quasi-static wave load, see point | in Figure 7-19.
2k
iN
ee ee p I
a ry av Al)
|
| ee IWS Prone
1 ++ e
—=s lane ae
Figure 7-19 Wave impact on slope
When water from the wave collides with the surface, a very short, very high, impact
pressure will occur, the dynamic wave load, wave impact or wave shock, see point 2
in Figure 7-19. (If you have difficulties imagining the difference between quasi-static
wave pressures and wave impacts you can easily measure them in a swimming pool.
Going down to the bottom, you feel the quasi-static pressures on your ears. Next, fall
flatly from the high diving-board: you will never forget the difference again).
A first approximation, see Figure 7-19 and TAW, 2002a, is:
Pmax 50% 8 Pw & Hs tana Pmax 0.1% *16 Py gH; tana (7.24)
in which pmax 0.1% is the maximum pressure exceeded by 1 in 1000 waves. This
expression gives values several times higher than follows from the quasi-static
pressures in the wave itself. The shape of the impact pressure distribution is assumed
to be a triangle with H as base length.
7.5 Load reduction
There are many ways to reduce waves. The best wave reductor is probably a shallow
foreshore where waves loose energy due to bottom friction and breaking, see Section
7.3.2. In this section, the starting point is the wave in front of the considered structure.
The two principal mechanisms are reflection and absorption. Reflection is total when
an incoming wave is returned and a standing waves occurs, see Appendix 7.7.1. In that
case, the wave transmission is zero. Absorption can be achieved in many ways. The
first kind of absorption occurs when the water in the waves has to flow through and
around many construction parts: stones, piles, bars, trunks and roots etc. The same
occurs at the edges of dams or plates which are meant as wave reductors. The second
kind of absorption is the internal work in structures: floating mattresses, bending reed
etc. In general, the relation between incoming, transmitted, reflected and absorbed
wave energy is:


170 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

1 2 1 2 1 2 .

gPsii = gps + spgie + absorption (7.25)
The effectiveness of a wave reducing device is often expressed by means of the
transmission coefficient:

Ky = Fry = Hp | Hy ~(Hr)y3/(H1)ys (7.26)
in which Fy and F7 is the energy flux of respectively the transmitted and the incoming
wave. For irregular waves, the expression with significant wave heights is a first
approximation. A short review of wave reductors will now follow.

Pile screens

A wall that consists of vertical piles can act as a wave reductor if there is little space
between the piles. The linear wave theory can be used, assuming that the transmitted
energy is proportional to the relative spacing between the piles, see Figure 7-20a.

ee ‘a

sos

L = ~ a9] ‘“ Dams ——

(a. aii
aD oh | rs Measurements

a“ jor Jia od :

: re | | -

ECON ee

ar) 02 O4 06 08 1.0 4 0 1 2

—— _ Relative closure (W = b / a) —— Relative crest height (R./ H)
Figure 7-20 Wave transmission through pile screen and over dam
In that case, with E = 1/8pg H?:

Hy =\(\-W) H? > Kr= 0-1) (7.27)
Figure 7-20a shows experimental results (Grune/Kohlhase, 1974). Equation (7.27)
underestimates the transmission, probably because the diffraction of the reflected
energy is greater than the energy losses in the wakes around the piles (both are
neglected in Equation (7.19)). An equally simple and satisfying empirical expression
is:

K, =V1-—w2 (7.28)


7. WAVES - LOADS 171
Dams
A very common type of wave reductor is a dam or reef with a crest around SWL. Now,
the linear wave theory leads to a solution that makes no sense. In the small-amplitude
wave theory, energy transmission is zero when the crest of a dam is equal to the water
level, see Figure 7-20b. In practice, Kr~ 0.5 is found for that case, indicating that about
25% of the wave energy is transmitted. Figure 7-20b shows the results of a great
number of measurements, relating the wave transmission to the relative crest height,
Re/ Hs; (Rc measured from the still water level). When Rc/ Hs; = 1, considerable
transmission is still possible. These points in the figure represent small-amplitude
waves which easily penetrate through the large elements on the top of a porous dam.
For realistic waves in design conditions, Kr ~ 0.1 for Rc / Has indicated in the figure.
For more information, see Verhagen et al, 2009.
Floating breakwaters
A floating ship, high and deep, can effectively block wave energy. Here, only low
structures are considered. There are many types of floating breakwaters: rigid, flexible,
porous etc. They have in common that they are only effective when the length in the
wave direction is greater than the wavelength. The mooring forces on the anchors are
a problem, as they may become extremely high, see Van der Linden, 1985 and Van
Tol, 2008. Floating breakwaters are probably only of practical use to reduce waves
temporarily, e.g. during construction. Figure 7-21 gives a theoretical curve and
measurements for a floating slab. 4 is the length of the protection, L the wave length.
16 IL
K, L
Floating breakwaters
| 1.0 ~x-
00 ie Van
O41 02 05 1.0 2 5 10 20 50
———— _ Relative breakwater length (2 /L)
Figure 7-21 Transmission vs. relative wave length
7.6 Summary
For the pressures and velocities in non-breaking, short waves, the linear wave theory,
see Appendix 7.7.1, is a valuable and comprehensive tool to get an idea of orders of
magnitude and of the influence of parameters such as wave height, period, water depth
etc. For the description of an irregular wave field, H, and Ty are mostly used when
working with single parameters instead of a whole spectrum.


172 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
To determine the shear stress under non-breaking waves, Section 7.2.2 should be
consulted (also for a combination of current and waves). Wave heights are limited due
to breaking. A general limit for individual waves is given by Miche:
2

Hy =0.142 L tan 2 0]
For irregular waves, the limits are about H;/Lo ~ 0.05 in deep water and H;/h = 0.5
in shallow water.
In breaking waves, the character of the flow in the waves changes completely and
becomes highly turbulent. Unfortunately, until now, little quantitative information
regarding turbulence in the surf zone is available, so, most relations are based on
empirical data. In many of these empirical relations, the surf similarity parameter, &
plays an important role:

~_ tana

oh,
Parameters such as breaking type, breaker depth, reflection, wave run-up and run-
down are related to &
Wave load reduction is possible with various devices e.g. dams, screens, floating
breakwaters etc. For an effective wave reduction, these structures must have large
dimensions compared with water depth or wavelength. Their costs should always be
in balance with their effectiveness, otherwise dimensioning the protection for the full
load can be more cost effective.
7.7.1 Linear wave theory
Progressive waves
Starting point again are the Navier-Stokes equations, neglecting boundary effects.
Outside the boundary layer viscosity can be neglected and the flow can be considered
irrotational. In that case there are no Reynolds-stresses and a velocity potential, ¢, can
be defined (limited here to two dimensions):

va08 08 28

ox oz


7. WAVES - LOADS 173
The basic equations (not shown here) can be solved when a surface profile is assumed
(see also Figure 7-22a) and the boundary conditions at the bottom and the surface are
taken into account:
A. (2at 2nx .
=—sin| ——-—— |=asin(@t—kx)=asind (7.30)
m3 ( TOL ) ( )
where the amplitude, a, is half the wave height, H. The velocity potential becomes:
x42, = 24 cosh(h+z) (ot-kx) aah
X,Z,0) =—— ———— cos(@t-kx .
k — sinh(kh)
Note: z = 0 represents the still water level and z is positive upwards.
z
: LL Vomta_|
nu fAe2a | a sinh(x)
et ee a a
\ 1 ,
1 t yf, ic
ou! ys qe
owe is
So Ss i i m V/,
1 ' Pag
4 ' ra =
Ae
ze-h \ ' e
o 1 2 3 4
— «
Figure 7-22 Definitions and behaviour hyperbolic functions
All other quantities in the wave, as a function of x, z and t, can be derived from this
expression for the velocity potential ¢. Table 7.1 presents the various parameters. In
the table, the extremes for deep and shallow water follow from the values for
transitional water depth, since for deep water: kh —> », so: tanhkh = 1, sinhkh = «0 and
coshkh = and for shallow water: kh ~ 0, so: tanh kh = kh, sinh kh = kh and cosh kh =
1, see Figure 7-22b.
Standing waves
Vertical walls act like a mirror: the incoming waves are reflected, the result is
superposition of two progressive waves with celerity +c and -c. This leads to a stand-
still of the wave, hence standing wave. The wave height doubles.


174 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Antinode Node Antinode
ES 7 ae H= 2H. 4a—
on iy
i 4 i \
Nowy Wd
Viet 4 i
rig : zeh
Figure 7-23 Standing wave
Figure 7-23 shows the pattern of a standing wave (or the often used French word
"clapotis"). Note that the orbits of the particle movement have degenerated into straight
lines. At the antinodes there is only a vertical movement and at the nodes movement
is horizontal. The wave profile for a standing wave is given by:
n=a, coskx sin@t =2 a; coskx sinat (7.32)
in which a; is the amplitude of the incoming wave. Other characteristic expressions for
standing waves are:
coshk(h+z sinhk(h+z
u=Q@a, cosh k(h+2) i pecoscat wa ca, MEF) Oo. pesin ox
sinh kh cosh kh
cosh (+2) a nor
=-pgz+pga,——_~ coskx sin 1
P=—-P8&Z+PSas cosh kh
(733)
When the wall slopes backwards, the vertical motion of the water at the interface
increases: the maximum water level exceeds Hi (which is the maximum level above
SWL in Figure 7-23). The standing wave pattern remains till the waves break
(depending on the slope and the wave steepness).


7. WAVES - LOADS 175
[Relative depth [Shallow water Transitional water depth [Deep water
Characteristics |” <1 aie bol
L 20 20°22 L 2
Vave celer a -bist -g -b-8t
Wave celerity e=5e gh = Fa Fp tanh kl ney 5aS
pesctwet [ear [gh 1-82 tanhih L=l)- 2
a 2a
1 2kh a1, 8?
[Group velocity jc, =c= feh Cg =ne==|1+— “| «ec Cg = 560 = 7 —
preoeny [ee " ene | al 2° 4a
[Energy flux _ pe. el pea. =Ec, =- pea =_ p gta
focrmuidh) [P= Ee, =z P80° gh | P= Ec, =x pagan Foe
[Particle velocity
z coshk (h-+2 =oae*
h
(,.2) sinh k (+2) =wae®
Vertical weea{1+2}coso — | w aoa ith?) 5g weeae® sind
a) sinh kh
[Particle
displacement
a fe cosh k (i+ 2 £=-ae¥ ¢
[Horizontal g=-£ |S cos g= a eShk(H+2) oo5g Sanae® cos
ONh sinh kh
sinh k (i+ 2) - ac
sinh kh
Subsurface cosh k(h+2) =-pez+pgac®
Subsurt p=-pgzt pgasind | p=-pg2+ pga) gf p=—psz+ pgae® sind
pressure cosh kit
Table 7.1 Summary of Wave Characteristics
A 2a 2a
a=— o=— k= 0=at-kx
2 T L


176 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
10
SN I i
~ | ; 1
“Ft : 1
< : H
a j \
Tih |
x +
> :
rN
1 i TR TT hi l
| SaaS i
| ie cael eae
an | >
blest ; 7 \N\
+7" ; a vi
Lf | | Ny
0.1 == a — 7
SEs \
L N
ra ay
Ami ry
} ry
ral ; rN
, ans
0.01 = : *
0.001 0.01 H 01 : 1
——> hil, '
Sn Sa oT Oe
shallow | transition + deep
water | ! water
——_hL  ———-— 1isinh(kh) ~—-------- _ tanh(kh)
hip = ==. t/cosh(kh)
Figure 7-24 Parameters in linear wave theory as function of h/Lo
7.7.2 Wave statistics
Wave spectrum
Wind is a turbulent flow with irregular velocity variations. So, when wind blows over
a water surface, the resulting waves will be irregular too, see Figure 7-25a. An irregular
wave field is best described with a so-called variance- or energy-density spectrum, see
Figure 7-25b.
A variance-density spectrum can be used for the statistical description of any
fluctuating signal, e.g. the deviation of a sailing ship from its course, the turbulent
velocity fluctuation or the surface elevation at one location, as shown in Figure 7-25a.
Without bothering about the mathematical backgrounds, it is assumed that at any
moment, the surface elevation, 77, can be seen as the sum of an infinite number of
simple cosine waves with a random phase a:


7. WAVES - LOADS 177
qn
er TT fT T°
> =
l 2
cudtillaaddldodtadllVaMM Aull 2.0
iL i CA La
2 H
[| [| | | 7 [ J $
4 Fo ~—
0 1 2 3 4 8 6 0 Oni! 02 03
>" timrin) fff, | ——> fhe)
Figure 7-25 Wave registration and wave spectrum North Sea
”, =a; cos(2x fit+a;) (7.34)
Every component j has a distinct value for the amplitude a and the frequency f. a is
the only random variable. A single component is related to the spectrum via:
1 > ae
34 * EH) AL (7.35)
where E(f) is the variance density and E(f) Af the variance. The unit for frequency is
Hz and for variance m?, hence the unit for variance density is m?/Hz which is
somewhat peculiar at first sight. The physical meaning of a spectrum is clear when one
realizes that the variance is identical to the energy in waves (= pga?) reduced by a
factor pg. The physical interpretation of a wave spectrum is thus the distribution of
energy over the various wave frequencies, hence the name energy-density spectrum.
ee ee
a ee
7
Ey
wind AN hanan
wave Uv yy ev
t
| Ech)
flu {| A
ay y
f
sea and sea EQ) swell
swell sea
swell 7
Figure 7-26 Examples of registrations and spectrum


178 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Figure 7-26 shows some examples of registrations of a fluctuating variable with the
accompanying variance-density spectra. The first is a simple sine, which has only one
period. The variance density is infinitely high and narrow, see Equation (7.34). For
pure noise, the spectrum is very wide. A registration like the one in Figure 7-25, gives
a spectrum with a clear peak, where the variance density has a maximum.
In Section 7.1 "fresh" waves were called sea, while swell was said to consist of "old"
waves. The last example in Figure 7-26 is for a situation where both occur, leading to
a so-called double-peak spectrum. Both peak frequencies are different and the swell
part of the spectrum is usually rather narrow.
Wave heights
The total area of the spectrum is equal to the total variance:
img = | E(Pdf = variance(,) = 0,7 (7.36)
0
Multiplied with pg it represents the total energy of the waves. Of course there is a
relation between the variance and some characteristic wave height, hence between mo
and the wave height. But first an unambiguous definition of wave height is necessary,
for what is actually a wave in Figure 7-27a? By agreement, the period of an individual
wave is defined as the time between two downward zero-crossings, T:, and the wave
height H/ is the highest crest minus the lowest trough between these zero-crossings.
Preferably, the wave heights are characterized by Hrms, as it is representative for the
wave energy and directly related to o, sce also turbulence in Chapter 2. It can be
theoretically derived that Hyms = 2V2mp. There is, however, a history with regard to
characterizing a wave field.
26 To
® OF a a
29 at
a a
4 Pe ,
a a
i a
10 Pa
= 4.
ied ae a
lw Poe
ae oe
oo 1 PT TT rn
100 50 20105 21 0.1 0.01
——~ _ P(H>H) %
Figure 7-27 Wave definitions and wave height distribution
Important elements in this history are visual wave observations and the Second World
War Until some decades ago, visual observations were the only way to obtain wave


7. WAVES - LOADS 179
information and even today much information concerning ocean waves is gathered
from observations by crew members on navy and merchant ships. A visually estimated
wave height, Hvis’, compared with recordings, appears to be equal to the average
height of the 1/3 part of the highest waves, H13. This wave height is also called the
"significant" wave height, Hs, but signifying for what? In the second World War, many
beach landings took place in Europe and the Pacific. The visually observed wave
height was significant for the commander of an amphibian craft who had to decide
whether to go on with the operation or not. Related to (narrow) spectra, His 4 vino,
in modern wave measurements and computations, the significant wave height is
therefore often indicated as H,,9. On shallow foreshores the relation between Hymns and
‘mo is no longer constant, so, the only good measure for wave heights would be vino.
But the “significant” wave height has become customary and it is hard to replace.
From the spectrum a wave height distribution can also be derived. For a (theoretically
narrow) spectrum, the distribution of wave heights can be described with a Rayleigh-
distribution, see Figure 7-27b:

2 2
ria oo| (7) |->9| =) (737)
Hyms H,
both expressions are equivalent, since Hs = HrmsV2.
This distribution is valid in water that is deeper than ~ 3H. In shallow water the highest
waves break and the distribution deviates. From Equation (7.36) follows directly that
Hs is exceeded by 13.5 % of the waves and Hims by 37 % of the waves. Extreme values
are Hi, ~ 1.5Hs and Ho.1% * 1.85Hs.
Attention is drawn to the fact that five indications for the characteristic wave height
have already been used, all of them common in wave literature:
H, = Hyisuat = Hays = Hiss% = Hmo = 4/m9 (7.38)
Note: A significant wave height, H;, with a Rayleigh-distribution is used to charac-
terize waves in a record of about half an hour, the so-called short-term wave height
distribution, representative for the state of the sea at a certain moment. For design
purposes, a long-term wave height distribution is needed to estimate the probability of
acertain sea state. Many different values for H; over a long period are used to form a
long term distribution, see Chapter 10.
Wave periods
Wave periods in an irregular wave field are defined as shown in Figure 7-27a. Many
attempts have been made to relate wind wave heights and periods. The relation
between individual height and period is, however, weak. To define a characteristic
wave period, there are, again, some possibilities. The average value can be used. It has


180 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
the advantage of simplicity: x waves during y seconds gives Tm = y/x. A better measure
is 7), the so-called peak period, where the energy density is maximal, see Figure 7-25b.
T, or Ty; (defined similarly to H,: the average period of the 1/3 highest waves) is also
still widely used. 7; ~ 0.97) can be used, rather independent of the spectrum shape.
The relation between the mean period and the peak period depends on the spectrum
shape and values for T/T; = 0.7 - 0.9 have been found. As a first approximation: Ty ~
0.87) can be used.
For "fresh" wind waves (sea), a wave steepness of s = 0.05 is often found. From this,
a relation between H, and 7, can be derived: Hy/1.567;? = 0.05 > T, = 3.6VH;, which
can serve as a first estimate when only wave height data are available. Of course, this
must be checked by measurements. In swell, a much smaller wave steepness is found,
e.g. s= 0.01 giving Tp ~ 8VHs.
Shallow water
In shallow water, waves experience many alterations, which will also affect the wave
statistics. For the wave height distribution, Battjes/Groenendijk, 2000, made a so-
called composed Weibull-distribution. Below a transitional value of the wave height
(Hy), the Rayleigh distribution remains valid. Above this value the exponent in the
distribution function has a different value (= 3.6):
HY
Jawa os, (4) H<H,
Pr{H <H}= x6 (7.39)
batiy-tooa] (1) H> Hy
Hy
Hy at a certain water depth is found from the spectral area, mo (known from
computations like SWAN, see Section 7.3.2), the foreshore slope angle and the
waterdepth. Hrs is also a function of mo and the water depth. Figure 7-28a shows
various wave heights as a function of Hr, all made dimensionless with Hims.
Figure 7-28a shows that the ratios between various wave heights and the Hm; change
when the waves enter shallow water. For very shallow water, Hj, = 1.6Hms instead of
2.15Hms as would follow from Equation (7.36). These corrections for the Rayleigh
distribution can be used in equations for wave run-up (see Section 7.4.2) or stability
(see Chapter 8). For more detail see Battjes/Groenendijk, 2000.


7. WAVES - LOADS 181
x ®
PT Tabbed ESBS
Composed te
epee Gameamed “TT er
“maser, | Seer
rope {HST
beter |
10 f a A
Po | FE rrevcgn cistron |
7 coor
wl tT tt tt) Ae
00 10 20 30 100 50 20105 21 0.1 0.01
SO“ HH, ——> Ss P(tPH) %
Figure 7-28 Wave height distribution in shallow water (Battjes/Groenendijk,2000)
The spectrum shape also changes when waves travel from deep to shallow water.
Figure 7-29 shows measured spectra of waves travelling across a shallow bar. The
spectrum area decreases considerably, the graph flattens while a new small peak for
low frequencies emerges. On top of the bar, the wave height distribution deviates from
the Rayleigh distribution, but behind the bar it recovers again!
© 1
F
1 2 |
SAY |,
fy =
Figure 7-29 Wave spectra across a shallow bar
7.7.3 Wave generation
Knowledge of wave generation by wind is still mainly empirical. A simple and
important method is the Sverdrup-Munk-Brettschneider method, see e.g. SPM, 1984.
‘The most important parameter in wave generation is the wind velocity, uw. When there
are no limitations in water depth or fetch, the relation for waves are simply:
H, T,
hs =0.283 and 28 = 1.2 (7.40)
Uy, 2,
in which Hy is the significant wave height and 7; the significant wave period (the
average period of the 1/3 highest waves). uw is the wind velocity (usually 10 m above
the water surface and averaged over | hour).
Limiting parameters are the fetch (the length over which the wind is effective in
generating waves), the water depth and the storm duration. With the water depth and
the fetch, F, as limiting factors, Equation (7.39) becomes:


182 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
py?
075 ooas{ 5)
Sts 9.283 tanh] 0.578) £4 |tann| ———\“" 2 _
Uy Uy gh
tanh| 0.578| 24
Uy
(7.41)
FE 0.25
, ye oan| £5
+ =1.20tanh| 0.833) 24 tanh| ———“" 2 __
2 Uy 4
tanh| 0.833) 8°
Uy
This may look rather grim, but including a hyperbolic tangent is only a convenient way
to include the influence of a parameter that vanishes automatically above some value.
For instance, the limiting influence of the depth on the wave height vanishes when
gh/w?> 5-10; above this depth, tanh ~ 1. Figure 7-30 gives some examples of calculated
wave heights for fetches of 10 and 100 km and water depths of 5 and 50 m. "Waves
unlimited" represents Equation (7.39), while the other curves have been drawn using
Equation (7.40). For very low wind velocities (w < 1.5 m/s), the applied depth and fetch
do not limit the wave height. For 1.5 <u <3 m/s a fetch of 10 km is limiting but a
water depth of 5 m is not. For winds of up to 15-20 m/s a fetch of 10 km is more
limiting than a depth of 5 m. For stronger winds, a depth of 5 m is more limiting than
a fetch of 10 km.
5 7
L tc 0
£4 depth 50 m+
noon
=| 7 “>
4 | -
' z pk,
7 Ea
_ Sere
1 perpen po fetch 10 km
0
0 MOK 20 Uses (nls) 30 40
Figure 7-30 Wave height as a function of wind, depth and fetch
Figure 7-31 shows wave periods for the same examples of fetch and water depth. For
the whole range of wind velocities, a longer fetch gives higher periods. For a sea (F =
100 km, h = 50 m), typical values are T; ~ 8-10 s and for an estuary (F = 10 km, h= 5
m), T.~4-55.


7. WAVES - LOADS 183
10) waves unlimited are
zs sero
ms
nd UL 4er7 fetch 100 km len em
‘i /| a depthSm oe
[ (ES
4 a ea
fetch 10 km
Z depth 5m
2 P finn ae
9 10 20 30 40
——— ~ Uz... (m/s)

Figure 7-31 Wave period as a function of wind, depth and fetch
Limitation by storm duration is treated as an equivalent fetch in Equation (7.40), see
SPM, 1984. Figure 7-32 gives an example for two fetches and two wind velocities.

; fit tty
= F=100 km, u,=30 mis
LL
a
14
PA ee warn
2 / [---| F=100 km, u,=10 m/s
0 —| F=10 km, u,=10 m/s
) 2 4 6 8 10 12
—————_ duration (hr)
Figure 7-32 Wave height as function of duration, fetch and wind velocity




8 WAVES - Erosion and stability
ssf
if | }

——S jE SSS al
= SS ———————
== : Pee,

Bee 2
Rae hs ee
P a 4 1
y . eS
» : x : eS 4 ‘
on vr Ts NS é
Revetment improvement works near Lelystad (photo W. de Vries)


186 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
8.1 Erosion
Before considering the necessity of protecting a bank, a shore or a bottom against
waves, one should have an idea of the possible erosion. In this book, erosion due to
waves is limited to local erosion. For banks and shores this will be treated on the basis
of beach and dune erosion research; for bottom erosion, breakwater investigations will
be used. Erosion due to long-shore or cross-shore sediment transport is part of coastal
morphology and will not be treated.
8.1.1 Erosion of slopes
ra 1.0
a
a p
%
HLA pe Sik 08 ft
ern
— aa z
—————$
Qu \ 0.01
z=pxo/® O14 10 100 1000
—_ d(mm)
Figure 8-1 Erosion of slope by waves
Waves acting on an unprotected slope cause a step profile. This is the natural
equilibrium profile for all slopes composed of loose material (see e.g. Vellinga, 1986).
Theoretically, monochromatic waves lead to a parabolic beach with z « x23. For
practical situations, Vellinga proposes:

2 = 0.39 wh 078 = py 078 (8.1)
in which w is the fall velocity of the particles; for the definition of z and x, see Figure
8-1. p is expressed in m?”?!

This Vellinga-profile is an equilibrium profile; development in time is not considered.
The erosion depth below SWL is about Hs. From Equation (8.1) the intrusion length
of the waves in the profile is then found by:

Le =p! 28 H} 28 (8.2)
Above the still water level the slope is assumed to be equal to the angle of repose.
Figure 8-1 gives a relation for the value of p in the profile formula. The given relations
can serve only as a first indication and should be applied for wave attack well beyond
the limit of stability, see Section 8.3.2.

Example 8-1
Asand slope, with grain size 0.5 mm, is temporarily unprotected. What is the erosion length
if this slope is attacked by waves with Hs = 1.6 m?


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 187
From Figure 8-1 we find for grains of 0.5 mm, p = 0.1. From Equation (8.2) we then find: Le
= 0.17178%1,6128 = 35 m.
8.1.2 Bottom erosion
Bottom scour due to waves can be important in front of walls where a standing wave
pattern is possible. From Chapter 7 we know that the highest velocities occur in the
nodes of such a wave and indeed, for fine sediments, the maximum scour is found
there. For coarse sediments, however, the maximum scour is found between the node
and antinode, probably due to a different eddy and ripple pattern. The standing wave
pattern for irregular waves is less distinct than for regular waves. This is also found in
the scouring pattern, which decreases strongly with the distance from the wall, see
Figure 8-2a and b.
anti-node ®) anti-node
. | | node | node
i 7 \ \ t i i
Sa a ae es Se ee
Ss eee
regular waves irregular waves
© vertical wall @ inclining wall
1.2 3
wie Bc) «= Dime Lag
i‘ ~ , |
0.8 CI -| ing
0.6 > |
on, Si | i
= | y |
oo 1 |_| —
005 0.10 0.15 0.20 0 1 2 3
hol Hg (m)
Figure 8-2 Bottom erosion in front of wall due to waves
The depth of the scour hole can be estimated roughly with Figure 8-2c (from Xie Shi-
Leng, 1981). For shallow water (small /io/L), hs * Hs can serve as a first guess. For
deeper water, the scour is considerably less.
When the wall is not vertical but inclining, the maximum scour will occur at the foot
of the wall, due to the backflow from the sloping wall, see Figure 8-2d. The erosion is
roughly proportional to the reflection coefficient, so a vertical wall gives maximum
values. As a first guess for all cases, hy » Hs can be used as an upper limit.
At the toe of a (sloping rubble mound) breakwater or groyne a similar phenomenon
occurs and the toe must be designed in such a way that any occurring scour does not
compromise the stability of the structure. Sumer and Fredsge (2002) performed model


188 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
tests and concluded that the equilibrium scour depth is a function of the incident wave
height, local wave length and structure slope. Their prediction formula can be found
in literature. More important than the actual scour depth, however, is the Jength of the
scour hole. Beyond this distance the sloping structure has no more influence and no
scouring is expected, and therefore this is the distance that is usually protected by a
scouring apron to solve the scour problem at the toe altogether. Sumer and Fredsoe
report that this distance is equal to L/4 for vertical wall breakwaters and 0.6x(L/4) for
rubble mound breakwaters with slope 1:2, in which L is the Jocal incident wave length.
8.1.3 | Wave scour around detached bodies
Similar to steady currents (described in Chapter 4), waves can also cause scouring
around detached bodies such as bridge piers or offshore structures. Two dimensionless
parameters play an important role here.
First, the ratio between structure dimension and length scale of the orbital motion
at the bed. This ratio is expressed in the so-called Keulegan-Carpenter number (KC
number) defined as:

KC= tT (8.3)

D

in which @ is the amplitude of the horizontal orbital velocity at the bed, T is the wave
period and D is the structure dimension (e.g. the pile diameter). Since the length of the
horizontal excursion of the water particles on the bed d; is equal to ds = ti/@ =
(T/2n)iip, (see e.g. Table 7-1) the KC number can alternatively be interpreted as KC =
2n(G/D), hence the definition as the ratio between structure scale and load scale. For
large KC numbers the approaching wave orbital motion acts similar to a steady current
when seen on the scale of the structure and the associated phenomena like flow
separation and formation of a horse-shoe vortex occur (see also Section 4.2). In fact, a
steady current can be seen as the limit case KC — «. For smaller KC numbers the
wave motion is too small compared to the size of the structure and these phenomena
cannot occur; consequently the scour is a lot less.
Second, the ratio between structure dimension and wave length, D/L. If this ratio
is large, the waves will diffract around the structure which causes a new load on the
bed (induced by the asymmetrical wave pattern behind the structure). At the same time,
the KC number will generally be small (because D is large) and thus flow separation
and formation of a horse-shoe vortex may not occur. This causes the scour process for
large piles (D/L > 0.2) to be completely different from slender piles (D/L < 0.2);
generally the scour depth for large piles is much less than for slender piles.


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 189
The equilibrium scour depth for live-bed scour around slender, cylindrical piles is
given below (Sumer and Fredsge, 2002). As expected, it is a function of the KC
number:
(8.4)
* =1-exp(-0.03(KC-6)) for KC26
Se,se
Here sis the equilibrium scour depth and Se.sc is the equilibrium scour depth that would
have been calculated for a steady current (using the methods described in Chapter 4).
The maximum (live-bed) wave-induced scour is thus always less than the current-only
case. For KC < 6 (@/D = O(1)) no scour occurs, and for the ‘steady current’ limit KC
— © we find the theoretically correct value se = Sesc. For other pile shapes and
orientations the equilibrium depth formula is similar but the parameters 0.03 and 6
vary; these can be found in literature.
The dimensionless time scale (see also Section 4.1) for this case is given by:
Kcy
T =10°°| = (8.5)
Py
The time scale is now a function of the bed shear stress, as in the current-only case,
but also a function of the KC number. The Shields parameter ‘¥ should now of course
be evaluated using the (maximum) wave bed shear stress (see Chapter 7). The time
scale is much shorter than the (already short) time scale for current-induced scour, so
the scour usually develops in a matter of minutes.
Finally, in case of a combination of waves and a steady current, the current usually
dominates over the effect of the waves and the equilibrium depth can be assumed to
be equal to the current-only case. In transitional cases (strong waves plus a small
current) an intermediate solution between the wave-only and current-only values can
be found; more detailed calculation methods are given in the relevant literature.
Example 8-2
The wave from example 7-1 (H = 3m, T= 7s, fo = 8 m) is approaching a pier with D=0.5
m located in a sand bed with dso = 300 microns (‘%< = 0.04). What is the expected scour
depth and how quickly does it develop?


190 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
We calculated in example 7-1 than the local wave length L = 55.2 m, so we have a slender
pile (D/L = 0.009 << 0.2). Also from Example 7-1 we know that ds = 1.44 m and tis = 1.29
m/s. With the new sediment size the wave friction factor in Eq. (7.4) becomes
cr = 0.237(1.44/(2x300x 10°°)°5? = 0.004 and the maximum shear stress in Eq. (7.3) twmax
= 0.5x 1000 0.004x 1.29? = 3.3 N/m?. This gives ¥ = 3.3/(1000x 9.81% 1.65x 300x 10°) =
0.68. Thus ¥ > ¥% and we conclude that we have live-bed conditions. (Note1: the criterion
> cis equivalent to u> uc). Therefore we can use Eq. (8.4) to calculate the scour depth.
For the current-only case we would find an equilibrium scour depth from Eq. (4.9) of Ses =
2x0.5xtanh(8/0.5) = 1.0 m. The Keulegan-Carpenter number in this case is KC = GoT/D =
1.29x7/0.5 = 18. So finally for the wave-induced scour we can calculate se = 1.0*(1-exp(-
0.03x(18-6)) = 0.3 m.
The time scale in this case is T = 10%(18/0.68)' = 0.02, which gives T =
0.02/V(9.81%1.65x(300x10*)')x0.5? = 239 s (!) via Eq. (4.5), so the scour can be expected
to occur almost instantaneously.
(Note2: The reason that we find such a short time scale is that the wave is relatively high in
respect to the waterdepth. In fact we have calculated a case when we have no wave until a
certain moment, and at that given moment suddenly a wave of 3 m and 7 s appear.)
8.2 Stability general
Several stable protections against waves are possible. In this book they will be divided
into three main categories, with the following keywords:
1 Loose grains, rip-rap, rock, open, permeable.
2 Coherent, semi-permeable, placed blocks.
3 Impervious, asphalt, concrete.
So? von) 2 _/ ropa )
y mm, _ friction, impact
—— friction clamp) ——
Ww
. > MIs
la WwW
rock placed blocks asphalt
Figure 8-3 Three main types of protection against waves
The loads on these three archetypes of protection are the same, but completely different
mechanisms determine the dimensions of the protection layers. The differences lie in
the transfer functions from the external to the internal load and from the internal load
to the response of the structure (strength). This can be illustrated by considering the
so-called leakage length, A.
Consider the flow in Figure 8-4a. In the filter layer, the flow is assumed to be parallel
to the interface, while in the top layer it is perpendicular. When there is no filter layer


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 191
(Figure 8-4b), some assumption has to be made for the thickness where parallel flow
can be expected. These assumptions may not be completely true for all revetment
types in Figure 8-3, but the concept is used for illustration purposes only.
a Ay
@® + (©)
PC eo
dk | ——>! filter
CE) subsci
Figure 8-4 Definition leakage length
Starting with these flow directions, the flow resistance of each layer can be determined.
The leakage length, A, is now defined as the length of protection in which the flow
resistance through top layer and filter layer are the same, see Figure 8-4a. This
definition can be expressed by (see also De Groot et al., 1988):
or iN, ye fkededr (8.6)
kp kpdp kp
in which keand kr are the permeability of filter and top layer, respectively, and drand
drthe thickness. So, a large leakage length means a relatively impermeable top layer
compared with the filter layer.
L h 1E
(3 ae
wel bees spercoae Nessa Bat\an
Roe
F F
A>>L A<<L
Figure 8-5 Influence leakage length
Ais a measure for the exchange between external and internal loads, see Figure 8-5. L
is some characteristic length of the external load (not necessarily the wave length, but
e.g. the length of the wave front). When A >> L, there is little exchange between the
outside and the inside and the piezometric level inside the filter cannot follow the level
outside, leading to a large head-difference. When A << L, the exchange is easy and
there is hardly any head-difference: the pressure gradients in the load are only
determined by L.
Table 8-1 gives some typical values for the three protection types of Figure 8-3. For a
protection of loose rock A << L, for a placed block revetment A ~ L and for an asphalt


192 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
protection A >> L. This may explain why these protections behave completely
differently, while the strength is also different.
Table 8-1 Typical values for A and L for different protection types

[kr (mis) S001

[Kr (mis) [050.0001

[A (mf Set
In the case of loose rock, A << L and there is no head difference across the top layer.
L determines the pressure gradients, leading to uprush and downflow velocities, which
in turn cause (drag)forces on the individual stones. Note: Obviously, the assumption
of flow perpendicular to the top layer (Figure 8-4) is no longer valid.
The strength of this revetment is a result of friction between the stones, hence of their
weight, see Figure 8-3a. Porous flow has some influence on the stability, but this is of
minor importance compared with the external flow forces. Thus, the stability ofa slope
with a rock top-layer is governed by the flow caused by the waves around the stones,
analogous to the stability in flow as described in Chapter 3. Section 8.3 deals with
stability of loose grains. A filter is usually necessary for stability, since the top layer
is very open and the underlying grains can be washed away without the filter.
For an impervious protection, A >> L and the head-difference across the top layer is
approximately H/2, see Figure 8-5. However, the transfer function from the wave load
to the response of the asphalt layer is such that this load is usually negligible. The head
difference causes a force which will try to lift the protection layer. The load is local
while the layer is coherent and heavy and, as a consequence, difficult to move.
Moreover, the cavity between protection and subsoil has to be filled with water within
part of a wave period, for which the porous flow is usually not fast enough. Wave
impact can cause damage, if it occurs very frequently, see Section 8.4.4. The stability
of the layer is governed by the pressure differences due to variations in the waterlevel
as described in Chapter 5. A filter for sand-tightness is unnecessary. A filter for
drainage can be applied when the phreatic level inside the slope, due to tides or surges,
will cause high pressures under the revetment.
In the case of placed blocks, A ~ L. In the cases where A >>L or A <<L, it is possible
to focus on a dominant mechanism, but when A ~ L, the situation is more complex.
The surface is usually too smooth for the water to exert drag forces. The load comes
from inside, caused by the pressure difference under and above the blocks. The
strength is the result of the cooperation between the blocks, either by friction or by
clamping. Now the porous flow is paramount for the stability and the filter plays a
crucial and complex role, see Section 8.4.1.


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 193
8.3 Stability of loose grains
As a logical continuation of Chapter 3 (Stability in flow), we will start to examine the
stability of loose material under waves and pretend that the loading situation and
stability under waves are not different from those in flow. After all, the water in a non
breaking wave, is just flowing to and fro, albeit with a higher shear stress. In breaking
waves, we can not expect this approach to be successful in a quantitative way, but it is
always instructive to try and compare the results,
8.3.1 Bed stability under wave loading
Chapter 7 gave Jonsson’s expression for the shear stress under a wave and with this
shear stress we could use the stability relation for flow, e.g. the one by Shields, which
relates the dimensionless shear stress to the grain diameter. The results of this approach
deviate from the original Shield’s results, probably due to different boundary
development in an oscillating flow. Figure 8-6a shows stability measurements in
oscillating flow presented by various authors, summarized by Sleath, 1978.
® Eos
yey |S | el er |
01 EEE —— "Shields" for waves (Sleath) Hi} = 02 {“
+ See aS f
— a one? i Lane
a. PES” & -
a a == computations
Cn Ton 4
oor 10 100 tooo |
A creatine 0 Ee dao nS 8
Figure 8-6 Modified Shields-diagram for waves and stability in non-breaking waves
Sleath uses the same dimensionless shear stress as Shields does (y), and the same
dimensionless grain diameter as Van Rijn for flow, see Chapter 3. So, the results can
be compared directly, see Figure 8-6a. For large d+ (turbulent boundary layer), Sleath
found a value for yto be 0.055, which is almost the same value as Shields. In stationary
flow, this value implies a relatively large amount of stones in motion. How logical is
it that the same value is found in oscillating flow? Two factors can play a role. The
criterion for the threshold of movement in oscillating flow is not quite clear, but a
potentially unstable stone in oscillating flow can not move a long distance, hence the
subjective threshold will probably be assumed rather high compared with the threshold
in steady flow. Another aspect may be the phenomenon we have seen in an
accelerating steady flow, which is that y increases as r increases.
The graph by Sleath is based on several investigations. One of them is by
Rance/Warren, 1968. Their results can be summarized by the equation (see
Schiereck/Fontijn, 1996):


194 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
2 2.5
a -oms{ | 3 > dysy = 2.15 2 (8.7)
T’Ag sq VT (Ag)?

in which ap is the orbital stroke at the bottom and ii» the maximum orbital velocity,
where dhso is assumed to equal 0.84ds0. Equation (8.7) has the advantage that no
iteration is necessary between the bottom roughness and the shear stress as is the case
in the Jonsson-Sleath approach.
Figure 8-6b shows a comparison between stability calculations with orbital velocities
from linear wave theory, Jonsson's friction factor and y= 0.055 for stones on a slope
1:25 and laboratory tests with regular non-breaking waves, see Schiereck ef al, 1994.
The computed wave heights at the toe of the slope, for which the material starts to
move, correspond quite well with the measured values. Equation (8.7) gives similar
results.
8.3.2 Slope stability under wave loading
Most research on the stability of stones on a slope has been carried out in the field of
breakwaters, which is very much related to slope protections and revetments, but it is
not the same. An important difference in the stability is the porosity of the entire
structure. Breakwaters usually have a porous core, while in dike revetments the core
is made of clay or sand. This has a significant influence on the stability of the
protecting armour layer as we will see later on in this section. We will start, however,
with basic principles and shortcomings and extensions will be discussed later on.
Encouraged by the successful results of the modified Shields-curve for waves, the next
step is using a slope correction factor and taking the breaking of the waves into
account. We will use the same slope factor as for flow in the slope direction (see
Section 3.3. For the 1:25 slope in the previous section, this factor ~ 1). For the velocity
in a breaking wave, no reliable expression is available. As a first guess, we will assume
that the velocity in a breaking or broken wave on a slope is proportional to the celerity
in shallow water with the wave height as a representative measure for the water depth:
u « \(gH). Following the same reasoning as for stability in flow, see Chapter 3, we
find:

PwgHd «x (pr-pw)gd* (tangcosa + sina) (8.8)

"drag" force resisting force _ slope correction
Note: + and - in the slope correction are for uprush and backwash, respectively. By
raising all terms to the third power and working with the mass of the stone
(M « p.d®) we find, as was already proposed by Iribarren, 1938:


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 195
3
Mae——Po (8.9)
A} (tangcosa + sina)”
Many tests were performed (mostly by Hudson, 1953) to find the constants of propor-
tionality in Equation (8.9). For practical reasons, Hudson finally proposed another
formula:
Ps Ase . Ase _ RG
Mae a [Kp cota) (8.10)

For relatively steep slopes (steeper than 1:2) the formulas of Hudson and Iribarren are
very similar, but for more gentle slopes the Hudson formula starts to deviate
considerably. The stability becomes infinitely large, which cannot be true. This means
that the validity of Hudson's formula is limited, because cotais insufficient to describe
friction and equilibrium on a slope: when @ = 0, M= 0 and when or> g, Mstill has a
finite value, which is nonsense. The range of a for which Hudson is valid is about 1.5
<cot @<4. The Hudson-formula was tested for waves that did not break at the toe of
the slope and did not overtop it. For other cases, extra corrections for Kp are sometimes
applied. Hudson's formula is simple and is used worldwide. Kp is again a “dustbin-
factor’ in which the accepted degree of damage is implicitly included. Kp has different
values for different kinds of elements (3-4 for natural rock to 8-10 for artificial
elements like Tetrapods and Xblocs). The Coastal Engineering Manual (CEM, 2003,
patt VI, Table 5.22) gives values for Kp for various circumstances. The simplicity of
the Hudson-formula has its price. Some limitations of the presented formulae have
already been mentioned. The most important limitations are:
Wave period
In the Iribarren-formula this parameter is absent. There are two ways in which the
period influences the stability. On the one hand, the period is related to the wave-
length, hence to the wave steepness and hence to the breaking pattern on the slope,
which definitely plays a role. On the other hand, inertia forces on a grain may play a
role, which depend on du/dt, hence on the wave petiod.
Permeability
The permeability of the structure must play an important role. The assumptions on
which Iribarren's formula is based, only include a kind of drag force on the slope. The
forces under and behind a grain are certainly partly responsible for the equilibrium. It
is easy to imagine that a homogeneous mass of stones reacts differently from a cover
layer of stones on an impermeable core. In the first case, a lot of wave energy is
dissipated in the core, while in the latter the pressure build-up under the cover layer
can be considerable.


196 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Number of waves
All model tests in the fifties and sixties were carried out with regular waves. In those
tests it appeared that the equilibrium damage-profile was reached in, say, one half hour.
The wave height in the tests was then usually declared to be equivalent to Hs. It
appeared from tests with wave spectra that the mmber of waves has some influence,
which is logical, as more waves mean a greater chance of a large one occurring.
Damage level
AAs for stones in flow, the threshold of motion for stones in waves is not always cleat.
The Kp-values in the Hudson-formula are supposed to be valid for 5% damage, but the
definition of damage is not very clear.
All these objections have led to new research activities, which have increased
following some failures of breakwaters, In a period of about ten years the recommend-
ed coefficients for the Hudson formula in the Shore Protection Manual for breakwater
design have increased by about 200%. In The Netherlands, extensive model tests were
cartied out to overcome the limitations of the Hudson-formula, The results of curve-
fitting the outcome of these large and smalll scale tests with irregular waves, finally led
to the following equations, see Van der Meer, 1988:

He 502

ws = 6 2po.s (=) E795 (plunging breakers)

Adnso VN) °™

aise _ 4 gp-oas (4) *¢ ’Vcota —_ (surging breakers) (8.11)

Adnso VN) °™
in which: Hee is the wave height at which the allowed amount of damage occurs with
H, defined as H, P is a measure for the permeability of the structure, Sa measure for
the damage, &» the Inribarren number related to the mean wave period, and N the
number of waves. The transition between the two expressions is found by equating
them, giving:

0.31 (=1..)

Exansiton =[62P°*! tan er 65) (8.12)
When &» > Gransiion the equation for surging breakers has to be used, for én < Exanstion,
the equation for plunging breakers. In practice, for cotar> 4 surging waves do not exist
and only the expression for plunging waves is recommended for use.

Because the Van der Meer equations were based on many measurements, it gives an
fitted average value of the scattered measurements, The relative standard deviations of
the measured critical stability numbers compared to the equations were 6.5% and 8%
for plunging and surging waves, respectively. These values can be used in either


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 197
probabilistic or deterministic design. Compared with Hudson’s equation, these
equations are a step forward, because more parameters are included. The physical base
of the Van der Meer equations is however still weak and in stone stability under waves
there is still much to be understood.

In the following the influence of the parameters in Equations (8.11) will be
demonstrated with some computations and a comparison with the Hudson-formula. A
standard case will be used:

H,=2m Tn=68 A= 1.65

cot a=3 N=3000 S=2

P=05 dhso = 0.6 m (300 - 1000 kg) Kp =3.5

Wave period

The influence of the wave period is incorporated in the breaker parameter ». Figure
8-7a shows the relation between the stability parameter, Hi/Adhso, and &m (with all
other parameters as in the standard case). Near Em = 3, Hs/Ad has its minimum. This
is in the transition zone between surging and plunging breakers, which appears to give
the most severe attack on the slope, see also Chapter 7. Note that typical values of
Hy/Ad lie around 2 for both formulae. Below n= 1, the Van der Meer curve is dashed,
since the empirical relation was not tested for those mild slopes, see also Figure 8-13.
In Figure 8-7b the period is the independent parameter. Note that periods smaller than
4.5 have not been drawn, since a maximum wave steepness (5 = Hy / Lo) = 0.06 has
been assumed, which, with a wave height of 2 m, leads to a minimum wave period of
= 3H. In the Hudson-formula, T does not play a role.

Permeability

A permeability parameter P has been introduced and the value for different structures
has been established by curve-fitting the results. Figure 8-8 (left) gives the values for
various situations. A homogeneous structure (no core) gives P = 0.6, a rock armour-
layer with a permeable core (di/ di = 3): P = 0.5, an armour layer with filter (di / dr
~ 2) ona permeable core (dr / de = 4): P = 0.4 and an "impermeable" core: P = 0.1.
Impermeable is again a relative notion, wave penetration in clay or even sand is almost
negligible, so, in these stability relations the slope is considered impermeable. Note
that P is not equal to the permeability of the structure, therefore Van der Meer called
P the “notional permeability”. Attempts have been made to derive P from porous flow
calculations, see Van Gent (1993) and Jumelet (2010).


198 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
TTT TT) CET T TT Ty
54 08
ee
*3 . 306 ae
NS
i ie TT
1 — vdMeer
eid ee
0 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
— > E = T..
Figure 8-7 Stability parameter as a function of and diameter as function of T
armour + fitter armour + filter 1
met CoCo
A » “SET
P=01 P=04 dog Pal
9 oie oie |
armour on homogeneous | 04
rip-rap armour — vdMeer
ei eae
P05 u
0 01 02 03 04 O05 06
—<—= Pp
Figure 8-8 Stone diameter as a function of slope permeability
Figure 8-8 (right) shows the influence of P on the necessary diameter. For permeable
slopes, the results from Hudson or Van der Meer are almost identical, but for
impermeable slopes, like dikes or revetments, the difference is considerable (0.75 m
versus 0.55 m, which is a 2.5 times heavier stone).
Number of waves
Nis the number of waves. Figure 8-9 gives the increase of the damage with the number
of waves during a test. With N = 7500, the damage can be considered to have reached
an equilibrium. When only storms of short duration occur and intensive maintenance
will be done, a smaller N can be chosen, leading to a smaller d, which is possibly
cheaper. 3000 waves with an average period of 6 s, represent a storm of 5 hours.
1
; ed
, r
S| weegee_aet™ |
easel 06 ——
{| we ACES
“Lo imegular waves “ft =
L — vdMeer
- =
oO
—— time 0 2 4 6 8 10
—= N(x 1000)
Figure 8-9 Damage versus time and stone diameter versus number of waves


8 WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 199
Damage level
The damage level has been defined in a more manageable way, see Figure 8-10a: S
=A. /d. This is an erosion area divided by the square of the stone diameter. In a strip
with a width d perpendicular to the page, S is more or less equal to the number of
removed stones. The advantage of S is the use of an area which can be objectively
measured by soundings. For the threshold of damage, S = 2-3, can be used. When the
armour layer is locally completely removed and the filter layer becomes exposed, the
damage can be defined as failure of the structure. Depending on the slope, the
corresponding S is about 10.
|
a mf) if 1 1 Td
ome SSS
ewan aes} |2a +
Cat a
G wi 2 — vdMeer [|
CAL. Filter layer 0
0 5 10 15 20
— SS
Figure 8-10 Stone diameter as a function of the damage level
Wave height and slope angle a
Figure 8-11, finally, shows the influence of the wave height and of the slope angle.
For these two parameters, Hudson and Van der Meer show the same tendency.
Realise that both the Van der Meer formula as well as the Hudson formula use a cota
relation, while Iribarren has shown that a cosa relation is fundamentally more correct
(which is especially relevant for gentle slopes).
Damage development
Another advantage of the Van der Meer formulae, is the possibility to take the damage
development into account. This can be important for repair and maintenance policies,
but also for the construction of a protection. S can be computed explicitly by rewriting
Equation (8.11). Figure 8-12 shows the damage as a function of wave height for stones
with dnso = 0.25 m, cot a = 2 and P = 0.6. This could be the core of a breakwater,
which is exposed to waves during construction. By building the breakwater in the
"moderate" season, the waves are usually lower than the design waves for the
breakwater. Figure 8-12 (left) shows the influence of the wave period on the damage,
for a duration of 1000 waves and Figure 8-12 (right) shows the influence of the number
of waves with a wave period of 6 s. Note that a wave period of 6 s gives more damage
than a period of 3 or 9 s, which again has to do with the transition between plunging
and surging breakers. The number of waves is not so important. With these figures and
wave or wind statistics from the area, an expectation of the damage can be determined.


200 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
ws _| | ye ST TTT TTT
08 i 0.8 |X}
‘45, | [AT |. REEL
ina
Fa [~psss.
04 Z 04 =
rae
al
0 0
0 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
—_" H, —— cota
Figure 8-11 Stone diameter as a function of wave height and slope angle
20 20 T
N= 1000 T=6 9 35 T=6s
S15 1: Wi S15
I;
10 f 10 Wy
1
(>? ae
0 et | 0
0 05 1 1.5 2 0) 05 1 15 2
—— HH. — 1
Figure 8-12 Damage as a function of wave height, wave period and storm duration
Example 8-3
A dike has to be protected with rock. The slope is 1:3 and Hsfor the design waves = 1.9 m
with a wave steepness, based on the average wave period, sm = 0.04. What stone class is
needed?
Starting point are the Van der Meer equations. For a dike revetment, in Equation (8.11), P
= 0.1. We consider 7000 waves (N = 7000) and S = 2 (only a little damage). The surf
similarity parameter, gm = 0.33/V0.04= 1.7. The transition between the plunging and surging
(Equation (8.12)), Eransiion = (6.2x0.199" 0.33)" = 2.5. Hence, the plunging part of
the equations has to be used. This leads to: Hs/Adnso = 6.2 x 0.118 x (2/V7000)®2 x EmS =
1.5. With a value for 4 = 1.6 this leads to dnso= 0.8 m or stone class 1000-3000 kg.
Using Hudson's equation we would have found: Hs/Adnso = (3.5% 3)°53 = 2.2 and a dhso =
0.55 or stone class 300-1000 kg which would be an underestimation of the necessary rock.
Mild slopes
The relations by Hudson and Van der Meer were based on experiments with slopes in
the range ~ 1:1.5 to 1:6. Very mild slopes (cota > ~ 10) with rock protection do exist,
e.g. when a pipeline outfall on a beach is protected. In that case the breaking type is
no longer plunging but spilling. Schiereck/Fontijn, 1996, did some research for this
case and found that the results are even more favourable than the Van der Meer
equations indicate, see Figure 8-13. In a spilling breaker the wave energy absorption


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 201
is distributed quite evenly along the slope, see chapter 7, indeed resulting in a higher
stability number. So, as a first approximation, the Van der Meer equations can be used
even for spilling breakers with the wave height in deep water as input value as a (very)
conservative approach.

12
3
3
38
a \ experiments
4}.
2 vdMeer |
a
0 [tT
0 1 2 3
SS &
Figure 8-13 Comparison Van der Meer with mild slope experiments
Shallow water
All formulas described (Iribarren, Hudson, Van der Meer) were derived for deep water
conditions. In shallow water the number of broken waves is increased and usually the
wave spectrum has a different shape. Therefore these formulas are not valid for
shallow water conditions. Equations for shallow water conditions are discussed in
Verhagen et al. (2009).
8.3.3 Other aspects
The Van der Meer and Hudson formulae were derived for non overtopped slopes.
When slopes are overtopped, there is a certain wave transmission, see Chapter 7. That
means that not all wave energy will be dissipated on the slope and thus the stability of
the armour stones will increase. Details for the design of overtopped structures (both
with a crest just above or just below water) are discussed in Verhagen et al. (2009).
Also loads on other parts of the construction, like the toe and the head of a breakwater
require special attention. Also for these aspects is referred to Verhagen et al. (2009).
The toe stability of a structure is essential, when the toe fails, the structure will also
fail.


202 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
8.4 Stability of coherent material
8.4.1 Placed-block revetments
In revetments, particularly sea defences, placed elements, mostly made of concrete are
very important. In the last decades, much research has been done in The Netherlands
regarding the stability of placed blocks on a slope under wave attack. Therefore, this
revetment type will be discussed in more detail.
5 D>
columns blocks interlock stones
embedded stones
® Sok Soe Sey filter layer
KES geotextile LES layer es KS = geotextile
% ° filter layer Ss ” a
send F cond
Figure 8-14 Block types (a) and filters (b) in revetments

Placed block revetments can have many shapes. Their coherence varies, blocks may
be pitched or interlocked. Block mattresses are connected with cables or geotextile,
and have some similarities with placed block revetments. Another variation in the
shape can be the upper side of the blocks which can be designed to reduce the wave
run-up, but for this chapter this variation is not very important. Figure 8-14a gives
some examples. The transition between the blocks and the underlying soil is another
variable. Figure 8-14b shows some possibilities (many other combinations are
possible). When the blocks are not exactly equal in height, a layer to embed the blocks
is necessary to correct the height differences. This is the case when natural material
like basalt is used. The extra layer is sometimes combined with a filter. Placing a
pitched stone revetment with natural stones requires well-skilled labour, and is
therefore hardly applied anymore apart from projects where aesthetics are
predominant.
In the past sometimes the blocks were placed directly on clay. As will be explained
below this result in a theoretically very stable revetment, however in practice such
revetments are not stable because of gully formation under the blocks.


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 203
Stability mechanism
In Section 8.2 we saw that the characteristic length of the loading phenomenon was of
the same order of magnitude as the leakage length: L » A. For loose grains and asphalt
the orders of magnitude are completely different and the relation between external and
internal pressures becomes very simple. When L ~ A, the situation is more complex
and much energy has been put into fathoming the secrets of placed block stability.
Figure 8-15 shows the phenomena that might play a role in the stability of placed
blocks during a wave cycle. From tests and calculations it was reasoned that
phenomena b and c are dominant in the process. In fact, the wave action on and under
the blocks cannot be separated and porous flow phenomena have to be taken into
account.
a ik
aC 3 Gan eae
b
er oe
c
a = forces due to backwash = wave shock
b = quasi-stationary pressures due to wave set-up _f = pressures due to falling water-mass
c= pressures due to wave front g = low pressure due to air in water
d= velocity field in wave h = forces due to uprush
Figure 8-15 Possible loading mechanisms in block revetment
Figure 8-16a shows which forces determine the situation at maximum downrush: the
pressure on the blocks is low in front of the wave, while under the blocks it is high,
due to the water pressure in the filter layer caused by the propagating wave and due to
the relatively high phreatic level in the slope. This causes uplift forces on the blocks.
Whether a block is pushed out or not depends on the strength of the revetment. Two
failure mechanisms are possible, the piston-type failure and the beam-type failure. In
case of a piston-type failure (Figure 8-16b) a single block is lifted out of the revetment.
In case of a beam-type failure (Figure 8-16c) a whole row of blocks is lifted. In both
cases two factors play an important role: in the fist place, of course, the coherence of
the blocks. In the case of piston failure this is the friction between them, For the beam
failure it is the clamp phenomenon, which will be discussed later on. The second factor
is the flow towards a stone when it is pushed out, With a relatively small permeability
of the filter layer, the block is sucked onto the slope because only very little water can
flow into the growing hole leading to a sudden decrease of the pressure under the
block, see Figure 8-16b, Both load and strength will be discussed in more detail.


204 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
@ tows © svengm es
sate _—
ok =“level in weit
iter
Load
| al Inflow
Figure 8-16 Load and strength of block revetments
Load
For the magnitude of the uplift force, the relation between the permeability of the top
layer and that of the filter layer, expressed in the leakage length, A, is very important,
see also Section 8.2. To demonstrate the relative importance of permeabilities, the
porous flow in the revetment is again simplified: the flow through the filter layer is
assumed to be parallel to the slope while the flow through the top layer is supposed to
be perpendicular to it (x is the coordinate along the slope), see Figure 8-17.
\
BO",
K << d,
Ax
i) i]
<<. |
< a Ve Vp + AVe
Figure 8-17 Flow through block revetment and leakage length
The flow in the filter layer can be expressed as:
vp =k MEE (8.13)
dx
and through the top layer:


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 205
vy = 4, =o) (8.14)
dy

Based on continuity, Avr-dr = vr-Ax, see Figure 8-17, hence vr = dr - dvr / dx, from
which follows:

be kr (br - - a

or (de -br) _ (de tr) bp —bp=N2 or (8.15)

dx kp dy dp Ne dx?
in which Np and Np are the piezometric head (N= z + p / pg) on the top layer and in
the filter layer, kr and kr are the permeability of the top layer and filter layer and dr
and dr are the thickness of the top layer and filter layer, respectively. From this
equation it can be seen that the head difference over the top layer depends directly on
A, defined in Equation (8.6). A relatively thick and permeable filter layer and/or a
relatively thick and impermeable top layer give a large A and hence, a large head
difference over the top layer.
This equation can be solved analytically if boundary conditions are highly schematized
and if flow in the filter layer is assumed to be laminar (or more precisely: the relation
between velocity and pressure is presumed to be linear). Its description is beyond the
scope of this book; the reader is referred to TAW, 2004 or to Stoutjesdijk et al., 1990.
Figure 8-18 shows the situation with a very high value of A and with a very small
value. So, a small A, the leakage length, is favourable for the stability of the blocks
and it is clear that a permeable top layer and an "impermeable" filter layer lead to the
most stable structure. This means that filter layers should be kept as thin as possible!

oy be Ke or
A \ —_
> apg
Alarge $ ‘A small
Figure 8-18 Head difference over block for large and small leakage length

Strength
The first element of the resistance against uplift is, of course, weight. Friction between
the blocks is next and Figure 8-19a shows the clamping mechanism, another
potentially important mechanism in a placed block revetment, see also Suiker, 1995.
When a block is lifted by the pressure from below, it will lift other blocks as well, due
to friction. As a result of their geometry, this will lead to large normal forces in the
blocks, which are passed on to other blocks and finally to some bordering structure.


206 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
F
ee k g k
L
Figure 8-19 Clamping mechanism
The mechanism also works when two beams are hinged to a spring support, between
two walls at a distance which is slightly smaller than the total beam length, see Figure
8-19b. From structural mechanics it is known that the maximum force, F, will be:
16 -kd?
Fax = 3 (8.16)
9 L
This force is mobilized when a block is raised and there is little or no room between
two blocks. The clamping will be less when slots between the blocks are present. The
blocks will be placed as close to each other as possible, but slots will always be present.
Taking slots into account in Equation (8.16) it is found that the strength of a block
revetment can be several times higher than the proper weight of the blocks, but the
resulting strength depends on the slot width and the assumed value of k, as they are
both uncertain.
Stability
A simple approach to determine the stability of placed blocks with a large leakage
length is as follows. The head difference across the blocks is caused by the run-down
of the waves, see Chapter 7. Figure 8-20 gives the pressures along the slope.
x
schematized wave front at a
= 7 Bo 7 Rex
—\ Prgdcose
‘ot (Pq-p,)adoose va
(®n-Pu)OACOSA-P,DRiow :
Figure 8-20 Stability of block revetment
The most unfavourable block is situated just ahead of the wave front. When the
expression for the run-down from Chapter 7 is used and when the only strength comes
from the proper block weight, the stability is given by:
Hy, cosa
(Pm — Pw) gd cosa — pyg0.33EH, =0 > aa (8.17)


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 207
Of course, the constant 3 in Equation (8.17) is only a first guess. A will influence the
load (see Figure 8-18) and friction and clamping will influence the strength.
Results
It is obvious that, with so many assumptions and so many factors, it is impossible to
give more than proportionalities in the relation between all of the involved parameters.
Tt was found:
0.67
As () (8.18)
ad’ \ Ag,
For various structure types, experiments were carried out to establish the constants of
proportionality, leading to the graphs presented in Figure 8-21a, which serve as an
indication of the stability. There is also an "analytical" method which takes more detail
into account. For more information the reader is referred to TAW, 2004.
8 0o————
© | acces] | © “—=—==F FA
6 a SS |
2/V | 3 SSE
3X g
r4 unstable} = |_| \ placed blocks |
| ir Nai
= ~ K
2 P doubtful 2 = .
3cosalé’ “P-~. loose rock ~
ioe ps
° 1 2 3 4 § 05 1 2 346
——+5 —
Figure 8-21 Test results for placed blocks on filter layer and comparison with loose rock
A closer look at Equation (8.18) and Figure 8-21, reveals:
© The simple stability computation using Equation (8.17) is too pessimistic, but the
trend is similar to Equation (8.18)’s trend,
© alarge A, leads to a low Hy/Ad, which is in line with Equation (8.15) where a large
A gives a large head-difference (¢r-¢r) and, hence, lower stability,
* also a large & leads to a low Hxe/Ad, which is a similar trend as found for loose
rock with plunging waves, see Equation (8.1 1a) and Figure 8-21b,
¢  dplays a complicated role in this equation. It is part of A, indicating that a thick
top layer gives a large head-difference (Equation ((8.15)), which is unfavourable.
But a thick top layer also means more weight and hence more strength. Assuming
all other parameters in Equation (8.18) are constants, it appears that: H a", so a
thick top layer is over-all favourable for stability.
In this book no discrimination is made between the combinations of different kinds of
blocks (pitched, interlocked etc.) and transitions (filter layers, geotextiles, directly on


208 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
clay ete.). Compared with rip-rap, placed blocks look superior and even better results
than the line presented in Figure 8-21 are possible. However, much depends on the
quality control during construction and thereafter. A permeable top layer is favourable,
but it can become impermeable, as a result of dirt, vegetation, shells etc.
We have also seen that a thin and "impermeable" filter layer creates a more stable
situation. That is why the idea of blocks placed directly on clay is a very attractive one
from a theoretical point of view. However, everything again depends on the quality of
the construction, which is difficult to assure. Biological activities in the clay after
construction may also have an unfavourable effect on the stability.
Example 8-4
The same dike as in
Example 8-3 has to be protected with concrete blocks. The slope is 1:3 and Hsfor the design
waves = 1.9 m with a wave steepness, based on the average wave period, sm = 0.04. When
the density of the concrete is 2300 kg/m, what is the necessary thickness?
The stability relation for placed block revetments in Figure 8-21 is given for é and not for
&n. With a peak period that is about 20% higher than the average period & will be about
1.9. H./Ad from Figure 8-21 then becomes ~ 2.4 In sea water, A becomes ~ 1.24, which
leads to blocks with a thickness of about 0.6 m.
8.4.2 Interlocking blocks
Interlocking blocks were quite popular in the Netherlands in the past, and still are in
some countries. The idea of interlocking blocks is that the piston type failure cannot
occur, and only beam-type of failure may occur. This might increase the strength of
the structure. However, because the wave load is not really a point load, but acts over
a certain width, the uplift pressure is also acting on more blocks simultaneously. In
this way the advantage of the interlock becomes less.
A clear disadvantage of the interlock blocks is the complicated shape, which makes
them difficult to produce and to place and makes repair impossible. Also the
construction on slightly curved dikes is a problem, see Figure 8-22.
Block mat structures suffer from the same problem. Therefore block mats are not really
considered much more stable than individually placed blocks. The great advantage of
a mat is the speed of placement. Especially when the required layer is not too thick,
with mats much more area can be covered in the same time than with individual blocks.


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 209
S = Bes 2 Ni
SS —— ——
SS SS SSS
= SS
—_
eS = ee oe
SS — = eT Eg SSS . a
ee e pa a re PS Pe.
ee x eS
ee ee ——
— . — = eas
ee se ee eS
- K - SORE ye AE oe ae
- Ji ¥ 297 Ele ee a a a |
SPR a nce Bh ee > “ees
Figure 8-22 Interlock blocks applied in Vietnam (photo Verhagen)
8.4.3 Generalised approach
Because in all previous sections the stability number is in some way a function of the
Iribarren number, Pilarezyk, 1998 suggested a generalised formula based on Equations
(8.17) and (8.18):

A, cosa

—_ =, 0 —— for cota > 2

ade fe (8.19)

with:

‘Y,, = system-determined (empirical) stability upgrading factor (VY, = 1.0 for
riprap as a reference and ¥, > | for other revetment systems),

® = stability factor for incipient of motion, defined at €= 1,

b = exponent related to the interaction process between waves and revetment
type (roughness, porosity/permeability etc), 0.5 < b < 1. For rough and
permeable revetments as riprap, b = 0.5. For smooth and less permeable
revetments it can be close to b = 1. The value b = 2/3 can be treated as a
common representative value for other systems (i.e. more open blocks and
block-mats, mattresses of special design etc.).

dand A, are defined for specific systems as:


210 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

for rock d= dy = (Mso/ps)"3 and Am = A = (ps — pw)/pw

for blocks d= thickness of block and Ay, = A

for mattresses d = average thickness of mattress and An, = (I-n)A, where n = bulk
porosity of fill material and A = relative density of fill material. For
common quarry stone (I-n) A= 1.

Permeable plate revetments (like open colloidal concrete, open stone asphalt and

polymer bonded material) should be considered as mattresses.

The stability factor ® for loose aggregates can be more generally defined using the

Van der Meer's formula. In the case of relatively impermeable core (i.e. sand or clay,

P= 0.1) and limited number of waves (N = 3000) the following indicative -values

can be determined:

© =2.25 for incipient motion (motion of 1 to 3 stones over the width of slope
equal to d,)
© =3.0 asa first approximation for maximum tolerable damage for two layer

system on granular filter (i.e. S= 8 and damage depth less or equal to
2dh)

These conditions are close to the average test conditions in the past when the rock and

other alternative systems were examined based on the Hudson's stability equation. In

Figure 8-23 for a given case the formula of Pilarczyk is compared with Hudson and

Van der Meer. According to Pilarezyk b = 0.5 should be comparable to Hudson and

Van der Meer.

As can be seen in Figure 8-23 the formula of Hudson and Pilarezyk (b=0.5) give quite

identical answers for slopes between 1:2 and 1:1.5. However, outside these ranges the

differences become considerable. For slopes steeper than 45° Pilarczyk results in a too

low value for the stability number (i.e. in fact this results in a too conservative stone

weight), but this is not very relevant because such slopes are typically not built from

placed blocks.

For gentle slopes (1:3 and more gentle) Iribarren is more conservative than Hudson.

With loose material without any interlock this is quite correct. Pilarezyk gives much

lower block weights. However, one should realise that the Pilarezyk formula is

specially developed for coherent material. Because coherent material on gentle slopes

is much more stable a high value for d is justified.

Placed block research in the Netherlands (Klein Breteler, 2008) has shown that for

high values of the Iribarren number and small leakage lengths the stability number

increases again (this is the same observation as was also included in the Van der Meer

formula for surging breakers). In Figure 8-23 the design line for placed block

revetments for structures with a small and a large leakage length are given. One should

realise that test with high Iribarren numbers were not done with extremely steep slopes,

but with low wave steepness.


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 211
6 '
a
A
5 é —— Hudson
i sven hnibarren
Xs ween Pilarczyk b=0.5,
3 ae = = = Pilarczyk b=1
g4 wh
ie Me * ——Design line, small A
2 Ss, ssseeeeesDesign line, large A
23 So
> oe,
B2 cn sissy
ee oy ae
“. Fmt
F OT aie ~~
0 ,
° 1 2 3 4 5
Inibarren number £
Figure 8-23 Comparison of the Pilarczyk formula with Iribarren and Hudson
(Ka= 4, Pu= 1, Som = 4%)
Example 8-5
In example 8.3 a revetment with a relatively small leakage length was used. In case of a
very open revetment, using a & of about 1.9 will lead to a H./Ad value of 4 when using the
design line for Dutch revetments. This leads with a value of A = 1.24 to a thickness of only
38 cm. With a steeper slope (not 1:3 but 1:2) the Iribarren number increases to 2.85. This
gives for very open revetments a Hs/Ad value of 4.5 and a block height of 34 cm.
The ®-value equal to 2.25 will be used further as a reference value for the stability
comparison with other alternative systems. The difference with stability of rock due to
the improving measures will be expressed by the upgrading factor ,.
The important difference between the loose rock and the alternative systems concerns
the behaviour of the systems after the initiated movement (damage). Due to the
self-healing effect of the loosely rock a certain displacement of rock units can be often
accepted (up to = 3). In the case of alternative systems i.e. block revetment, the
initial damage (i.e. removing of one block) can easily lead to a progressive damage;
there is no reserve-stability. In all cases, experience and sound engineering judgement
play an important role in applying these design rules, or else mathematical or physical
testing can provide an optimum solution.
An overview of different upgrade factors ¥, is given in the table below:


212 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
construction construction
[Loosreck SSC
Linked/interlocked blocks on geotextile on good clay
Open stone asphalt, open colloidal concrete, gabion
The values given in the above table are very rough approximations and should always
be used with great care.
Example 8-6
When applying the Pilarczyk formula on our example, one should use an upgrade factor ¥%,
= 2 for modern, open block structures (like Hydroblock or Basalton). In this case b = 0.67.
The wave height was 1.9 m. For the 1:3 slope the Iribarren number is 1.9. This will lead to
a Hy/Amd value of 2.8 (when using an upgrade factor ‘” = 2 and a stability upgrade factor of
= 2.25), which results in a block size of 55 cm.
8.4.4 Impervious layers
Uplift
Impervious layers can be made of asphalt or concrete. The differences with blocks are
that the protection forms a whole instead of consisting of separate elements and that
the fluctuating wave pressures can penetrate only a limited distance from the edge of
the protection. Usually there is no filter layer (the protection itself is sandtight).
~__SWL ——TT sx SW. me
a <i ein tel eee
Wj, U2 fr W2
Vz d Z d
D Qe-- me
Figure 8-24 Impervious layers in waves
In the case of a protection which is shorter than a wave length, the equilibrium is
simply given by:
(Pn ~ Pw) 84> Py 3L—*> _— (8.20)
2 2a
cosh| —h
(7)


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 213
In certain places, the wave pressure on top of long protections is half the waveheight
below the subsoil pressure, see Figure 8-24. In those places, the pore pressure tries to
lift the protection. This can only be effectuated if water flows into the hole between
bottom and protection. TAW, 2002a, shows that this is hardly possible and that this is
not an important stability factor for impervious revetments. Threats are wave impacts
and porous flow due to waterlevel differences over the protection, see Chapter 5.
Wave impacts
In Chapter 7 the special character of wave shocks compared with the cyclic quasi-
static pressures was discussed. These shocks induce stresses in the material which
should not exceed the failure stress, see Figure 8-25.
The response of the layer depends, among other things, on the stiffness of the layer
and the subsoil. The protection layer (asphalt or concrete) has an elasticity E (Pa) and
the subsoil has a stiffness c (Pa/m). The wave impact causes a stress, o, in the layer.
Figure 8-25 shows the influence of the stiffness ratio, E/c, based on some assumed
values of wave impact and layer properties. A stiff layer on a soft subsoil gives the
highest stresses. So, a concrete layer on soft clay is not a logical choice when wave
impacts are to be expected.
HI2., 6
3 \ Ed
o4
DY & s
Ao =
o &5
a
0
0 200 400 600
— > E/c
Figure 8-25 Wave impact on slope and influence material properties
To calculate the stresses, the load and response mechanism is schematized as a
cushioned-spring system, see TAW, 2002a. The results are:
o= Pim. | exe BE cot sin) with B = 4 2-65¢ (8.21)
Bua 2 2 2 \ Ed
in which Pnax is the value for the wave pressure as mentioned in Section 7.4.3 and H
is the individual wave height. Fatigue plays an important role in the critical stress, o:.
Compared with a onetime load, a: can be 2 to 10 times lower. d has to be determined
iteratively from Equation (8.21), which is something that has to be done with a
computer. In Figure 8-26 the results are given for asphalt concrete (E = 10-10° Pa) on
rather well compacted sand (c = 100-10° Pa/m) and on clay (c = 30-106 Pa/m) and a
storm duration of 10-20 hours with wave impacts.


214 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
This picture shows that for mild sand slopes (< 1:3), the thickness of an asphalt
concrete protection is relatively thin: < 0.2 m, even for very high waves. In that case
the quasi-stationary pressures due to a high phreatic level inside determine the
thickness of the layer, see Chapter 5. On clay, however, wave impacts can make thick
layers necessary.
1.0 7 +
4 Ko pir2
—— sand (c = 100 MPa/m) » Be
08 a ae
~---=== clay (¢ = 30 MPa/m) fd | | g
é “ s
0.6 A ae | 5
: r: ” 2
af Pigg i al
04 =i = > 13
clay slopes 1:2. 1:3. 4:4 ae
02 a - wet Z
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
——>
Hg (m)
Figure 8-26 Necessary thickness of asphalt concrete on sand or clay
Fatigue
The number of loads that leads to fatigue is given by:
Np=kyo (8.22)
in which ky and ay are fatigue parameters of the asphalt, to be determined by the
producer or from test samples of the placed asphalt, and cis the tension stress at the
underside of the asphalt (in MPa). Note that this formula is not dimensionless.
Failure will occur when the Miner-sum exceeds 1. So failure will not occur as long as:
yes (8.23)
Ny
in which
Ni the number of load repetitions in a storm
Ni number of load repetitions leading to failure (Equation (8.22))


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 215

Because of the fact that all waves in a storm are different, and because also during the
storm the waterlevel is varying, the calculation of the critical load requires quite some
bookkeeping. This work can be done with the computer program GOLFKLAP (De Loof
et al., 2006).
Filters
A filter under an impervious protection layer is not necessary for sand tightness. For
the stability of the layer as a whole it is even undesirable. The leakage length, A, is
already infinitely high if the top layer is impervious and a filter layer does not improve
the situation. When the weight of the layer is less than the excessive wave pressure,
the strength of the layer must take care of the equilibrium. The situation is similar to
the one in Figure 8-24 and what was said there, is also valid here. A filter can be
applied for drainage, to prevent excessive pressures against the layer due to a high
phreatic level inside the slope, see Figure 8-27. The effect of a filter on pressures has
to be determined with a porous flow model, see Chapter 5.

a b

ya without —

filter : filter
Figure 8-27 Influence filter under impervious layer on phreatic level

8.5 Material quality
Although usually the strength of the material itself is good enough to withstand to
wave loads, often the material suffers from abrasion. In most cases small pieces of
rock or sand are moving around in the breaker zone. This movement may cause quite
some damage to the protection material. Especially in case of bituminous cover layers
this is a point of attention. With normal, impermeable asphaltic concrete the problems
are limited, but with open stone asphalt abrasion is a serious problem.
Prefabricated concrete usually does not cause any problems, but concrete made in situ
is often below standard (especially in developing countries) due to the limited quality
control in the field.
Figure 8-28 shows the same blocks as presented in Figure 8-22 but afters some years.
The top layer is complete worn out because of abrasion by small rocks and sand in the
wave action.


216 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
@ ie, 4 Peek
¥ ee he fa a> &
Cie 4 ees zo
G gage = (eee. ey
Pt dOMee aah / 2
2 5 ies 4 :
eo J ae ——_ |
4 + ae. isy eee ee
‘ tee Per A se Me ok Ce
# ( RI oe
= eos fas ee
R- Tes!
= ' at $3 soe
4s Bie | MET Rh
> SR be & a
ae ° le ES on a “ay
e a
ori a © ee) ee
| oe 2
ee Mm ao lg 4
. Re i aE es pigs) Hees
. eg, Fi @ “ TES, GARE |
omer" - fe yo ee i
Figure 8-28 The same blocks as in Figure 8-22, but after three years in service
8.6 Summary
Firstly some simple relations for erosion of unprotected slopes and of bottoms in front
of walls have been presented.
In this chapter the main item is stability in waves. It appears that most relations for
flow situations can also be used for non-breaking waves, as long as the increased
shear stress under waves is taken into account. In breaking waves, only empirical
relations, like the one by Hudson:
3
Ps Hye Hse _y
M=—>—— (or: —S=2/Kp cota)
Kp & cota Ad
or Van der Meer:
sc sy?
= 6.2p™18 (=) ms Junging breakers
Myso Ti Sm (plunging )
Hse 1.0P-913 ()"«  leot a (surging breakers)
Adnso VNy O°”


8. WAVES - EROSION AND STABILITY 217
can be used.
The latter is to be preferred, since more parameters are included. The permeability of
a slope is one of the most important differences between the two formulae. With Van
der Meer’s formulae it is also possible to calculate the damage as a function of wave
parameters. Note: The subscript c indicates ‘critical’ values in the stability parameter
H,./Adyso, thus distinguishing between stability and mobility parameters, but is not
used consequently.
Typical values of the stability parameter in breaking waves, Hye/Adyso, lie around 2 for
rather steep, continuous slopes. Higher values are valid for mild slopes. For toes, this
value can also be higher, depending on the relative depth of the toe. Low crests can
lead to an increase of the stability parameter, while at the head of a dam or breakwater
twice the mass computed for the trunk needs to be used.
For placed-block revetments, the mechanisms are explained and an empirical stability
relation is presented. It can be concluded that block revetments of good quality, can
stand greater wave loads than loose rocks. Typical values of the stability parameter,
Hyc/Adnso, are about 1.5 - 2 times the value for loose rock.
Waves will usually not be able to lift impervious-layer revetments of some size. Wave
impacts can influence the thickness of the layer. A filter is not necessary, except
possibly for the drainage of excessive pressures due to tides or surges.




f et
Penee SSPE se 3a ee
OS!
= it mm Sings er ee
Bee " , i ee
pee i Santee.
Ae , { pence SS >
ae ae , ec. ° alee
te 4 eet ae
<2 a — - ee — ne
eo a OS th Se
BS espns = SS a
{tS ae eer. Rt
PEA ee Lr Pe 1s tye RS
< ie . ic eee aN =
a Po aS. ee .
1 a hem ee aoe Te
itl Bi «a eS SE Sy .
OE Teme ee
ae: s ee) aS PR aS ;
Pushbarge Lianco near Zelzate (photo Panoramico)


220 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
9.1 Introduction
This chapter treats the protections of waterways’ beds and banks of waterways against
loads caused by ships. Ships cause an interesting wave pattern and currents, involving
many elements of the previous chapters. A summary of these phenomena will be given,
with a focus on the resulting loads. For a more extensive treatment of some aspects the
reader is referred to e.g Stoker, 1957 or RWS/DHL, 1988
Sd et ae

Vv |
_>

Figure 9-1 Flow around fixed object versus moving object in stagnant water

From a hydrodynamical point-of-view, a moving ship is similar to flow around a body
(see Figure 9-1). Figure 9-2 gives an overview of the relevant phenomena. The water
level depression along the ship's hull and the so-called return flow, which are well-
known from observations of ships in canals, are also present when water flows around
a body. This water-level depression is the primary wave with a wave length of about
the ship's length. From the point of view of an observer on the bank, the primary wave
starts with the front wave, followed by the depression and ending with the stern wave.
Within the primary wave this stern wave usually results in the most severe attack on
the banks.
The much shorter waves that originate from the hull and which are visible on aerial
photographs, are the so-called secondary waves. Both types of waves behave like
"normal" water waves, which means that the relations for wavelength, celerity etc. in
Chapter 7 are valid. In practice, the primary wave can be long or short, depending on
the same depth-length relations as mentioned in Chapter 7; secondary waves are
practically always short, except for secondary waves produced by high-speed boats. In
relatively narrow navigation channels the primary waves are important, otherwise only
the secondary waves play a role.
The currents caused by the ship's propeller, the so called propeller wash, have the
characteristics of a jet. This jet is particularly important when ships manoeuvre near a
berthing place or a jetty. When sailing, the jet flow is partly neutralized by the speed
of the ship.
Many investigations into ship motion have been carried out in the past, but most of
them were for shipbuilders. The results of the investigations by Delft Hydraulics
(Deltares) for the Dutch Rijkswaterstaat in the seventies are an important source of
information. Although this research was set up primarily for inland waterways, the


9. SHIPS 221
results, especially the literature survey, have a wider range of applications. For more
details, see RWS/DHL, 1988.

Most damage on revetments is not caused by the largest ships, which often sail
relatively slowly and relatively far from the banks. Small service crafts, tugs etc,
sailing full power near the banks, actually do most harm.
squat
Water-leve! (J undisturbed
depression water level
1
1
1
, 4 A
front wave 1 ~¥ANN
104 N.
174 ‘.
water-lev if N. return
. aS
depressio! ! current
Al X.
‘VN .
stern wav H L YE J
1 of RS
! x AB ” secundary
vf yy N. waves
7 I a
' N
propeller wash
4H
secundary
wave train 4
y. —»>time
undisturbed
water level = frontiwave
stern wave <—— return current
Figure 9-2 Phenomena around a moving ship in a waterway (from RWS/DHL 1988)


222 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
9.2 Loads
9.2.1 Limit speed
All mentioned hydraulic aspects are related to the ship's speed. For design purposes,
this speed can be determined in several ways. When speed data of the relevant type of
ship are available, it is preferable to use these. If not, the speed can be calculated from
the engine power and the ship's resistance (which consists of both skin friction and
form drag, see Chapter 2). These calculations will not be treated here. For a first
estimate, the physical properties of waves can be used. Regardless of its engine power,
a ship can not sail faster than its own primary wave. This limit speed is analogous to
the sound barrier for airplanes, Self-propelled ships can pass this barrier if they are
able to plane on the water (e.g. speed boats). The speed of displacement-type ships can
not exceed the celerity of their own generated waves, unless they are being towed by
another (longer) ship. Assuming that the maximum wave length caused by a ship is
equal to the ship’s length, the limit speed can be approximated with the wave celerity
in the linear wave equations by eliminating the wave period from the equations:

gl th

c=© tanh
mL Vs0= Stan 1)
L=cT =
In deep water, V7 is only proportional to the square root of the length of the ship. In
shallow water, V/ is only proportional to the waterdepth and the length of the ship does
not play a role.
original water level: SS a
e il Reno er ReNRS Sr Reena (Ve tog ae ey =
[
as
h B _—_ h —> +(+h-z
b  A=bh vy, v,+U,
(yo
Figure 9-3 Definitions in 1-dimensional approach

If the cross-section area of the ship (As = BD) is not negligible with respect to that of
the waterway (4. = b-h for rectangular channels, for prismatic cross-sections one has
to determine the real wet cross-sectional area), the above approach is no longer valid.
Ina relatively narrow and shallow canal, the water movement around the ship can be
schematized as a 1-dimensional flow situation (see Figure 9-3), where the ship lies still
and the water flows with v;. This was done by Schijf, 1949. In that case, the flow can
be approximated with the Bernoulli-equation, neglecting energy losses and the
continuity equation. This method also includes the following assumptions: the ship
sails in the axis of the canal, prismatic cross-section of ship's hull, ship is horizontal,


9. SHIPS 223
channel cross-section is prismatic, return flow velocity u: and waterlevel depression
are constant over the remaining channel's cross-section and the depression of the ship
is equal to the water-level depression. The equations then become:

2 v,tu,)°
Bernoulli : pete a poze
2g 2g (9.2)
continuity: bhv, =(bh-BD-bz)(v, +u,)=O
The limit (maximum) speed is reached when the return flow becomes critical or, in
other words, the derivative of the return flow with regard to the water-level depression,
z, is zero:
d(v,-+u)(Ac— As —bz
dQ _ dvs tu)(Ac~ Ashe) _ 4 (9.3)
a& a&
In combination with the Bernoulli-equation, it is found:
2 2/3
AW 3 oy (9.4)
Ae 2gh 2 (gn)
1
a GGG
os NM |
ee ee
Sot N]T PP Pp
> a a a |
Sut | RSP PP
a a |
ot | Pes
“TTT ye
of Ty fT tT
0 0.2 04 06 08 1
As/ Ac
Figure 9-4 Limit speed (relative to water depth) as a function of blockage As/Ac
Figure 9-4 represents the solution of Equation (9.4). When A, is negligible compared
with A,, it shows that the limit speed is again the same as follows from the linear wave
theory: V;= yh. If the ship blocks the canal completely, of course, the limit speed is
0.
Figure 9-5, finally, combines the results for the limit speed according to linear wave
theory and for the 1-dimensional approach. In deep water, without blockage, the limit
speed solely depends on the length of the ship. With different degrees of blockage, this


224 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
limit is reached in a greater water depth. These lines result from completely different
assumptions, so the transition between the solid line and the other lines may not be
represented correctly.
os
Aveo
a ASACD2
06 | ——asacco :
— -AsIAC=O.6 ne / i
—ASIA=O.8 A f Aa
03 x , ;
y a ‘
Boz oa ot ae
o1 et ee art
° a
oot as 1 0
hie
Figure 9-5 Limit speed (relative to ship's length) as a function of water depth and blockage
For the purpose of bank design, a speed of 90% of Vi is recommended. A higher speed
is technically and economically not attractive and will not be used by any captain. A
lower speed, even with traffic regulations, is not recommended for design purposes,
because there will always be captains that will not adhere to the speed limit.
9.2.2 Primary waves
The water-level depression (z) and the return current (w,) can be derived from Equation
(9.2). Written in a dimensionless form:
v2 _ 2z/h
vse =
gh 1-A,/4,-z/h)~-1
(4/4278) 65)
Up 1 |
[gh 1-4,/ A,-z/h [gh
The water-level depression as a function of the blockage (4,/A,) and v, can now be read
from Figure 9-6, which is a graphical presentation of the solution of the first part of
Equation (9.5). A speed of 90% of V; is recommended for design purposes (the solid
line in the figure). Figure 9-7 gives the return current in the same way.


9. SHIPS 225
04
LI eee
i
A
[TA
a A ce
Aa
eet ee PO
(er oe
A or eS
a
0 04 02 0.3 04 05
As/Ac
Figure 9-6 Relative water-level depression as a function of blockage
In Van der Wal (1990) observations of full scale tests are compared with the above
calculations. It was found that the standard deviation of for the water-level depression
and the return current is given by:
ote) =001re ot,)=001 ot (9.6)
a
A ee |
wot | | | | per | Fy
a cee |
a cc ce
5s LPP K4 Tope |
< ~E], YP pee Pty
ey) TAP Ie |
PA ee eee
[Awl TTT vszosw_
[fet TT | vseoouf_ [| T
Welt er
oF LT ye
0 01 02 03 04 05
As/Ac
Figure 9-7 Relative return flow velocity as a function of blockage


226 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Practical complications
The equations for z and u, were derived for idealized situations, assuming a rectangular
cross-section of the canal, the position of the ship in the canal centre-line, etc. For
design purposes, the following corrections can be made:
Canal profile
When the profile is not rectangular, but e.g. trapezoidal, the width, b, is equal to the
width at the water surface, but the depth, /, to be used is Ac / b, see Figure 9-8.
< b >
channel axis s
h=Acb iz y ry
Figure 9-8 Deviations from ideal case in 1-dimensional approach
Flow velocity
If there is a flow in the channel, vs and / have to be relative to the flow velocity (so,
0.9V; keeps the same value). From this, the water-level depression directly follows.
The (positive or negative) flow velocity has to be added to the return flow, u,.
Eccentric position ship
If a ship is sailing at a distance y from the axis (see Figure 9-8), the water-level
depression and the return flow can be corrected as follows:
2y
Zece -(24); Up-ece -(r 2 hn (9.7)
b b
As the minimum distance to the bank, the width B can be used (see Figure 9-8).
Multiple ships
Frequently there are situations where there is more than one ship in a cross-section of
a waterway, e.g. when two ships encounter or when a ship overtakes another one. Only
the last situation causes a higher load than a single ship. A first approximation is then
to add the cross-section areas of the two ships and to make the calculations for one
large ship.
Finally, for the height of the stern wave, which forms usually the most important load
on a bank, the following approximation can be made:
Zmax =1-SZece (9.8)
According to Van der Wal (1990) the standard deviation in the constant is 10%.


9. SHIPS 227
9.2.3 Secondary waves
The primary wave more or less has the characteristics of a negative solitary wave; the
secondary waves are formed by a number of periodic waves, a wave train (see Figure
9-2). Secondary waves are caused by the pressure pattern due to the discontinuities in
the hull profile. These discontinuities are found at the bow and at the stern both of
which emit waves. The bow is usually dominant. The wave emission from the bow
can be thought of as a succession of travelling disturbances (see Figure 9-9).
ATT OS
_
/- So Zz DIVERGING WAVE
TRANSVERSE X
[ | WAVE \ a. os
| (OR pl pettescn—
Figure 9-9 Origin of diverging and transverse waves

Each disturbance creates a circular wave, like the waves caused by a pebble thrown
into a pond. These circles are enveloped by the so-called diverging wave. Behind the
ship, the remnants of the circles can be seen as transverse waves. The transverse waves
travel in the same direction and with the same speed as the ship, while the diverging
waves travel more slowly. The velocity difference is accounted for by the angle
between the waves and the sailing line (c = vs cos g).
Figure 9-10 shows the secondary waves behind a ship with the diverging and
transverse waves. The first type diminishes with the square root of the distance
perpendicular to the sailing line and the second type diminishes with the square of this
distance. The diverging waves are dominant in this pattern (for Fr = vs/ Veh < 0.75).
Where transverse and diverging waves meet, they interfere forming cusps, which are
dominant for the stability of revetments. For moderate speed (Fr < 0.75), the cusp
locus line is at an angle of about 20° with the sailing line and the direction of
propagation of the cusps is at an angle of about 35° with the sailing line, hence the
angle of approach for a bank parallel to the sailing line is 55°. For higher speeds the
cusps propagate more in the direction of the sailing line. For Fr = 1, transverse and
diverging waves coincide and for Fr > 1 transverse waves can no longer exist. This is
interesting for high-speed ferries and other very fast sailing ships, but self-propelled
displacement ships will never reach this limit. Assuming a practical limit of 0.97, the
value of Fr remains below 0.75 already for small blocking percentages, as can be seen


228 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
from Figure 9-4. This means that the pattern of Figure 9-10 is generally applicable for
waterways with self-propelled displacement ships.
~ 2. \DIVERGING WAVE
TRANSVERSE WAVE SQ
wna pn tN
7 LINE
le g 19° 28"
Lo F CUSP LOCUS LINE
POD SX Ee
ae 55°
wd WAVE PROPAGATION “J
/ LINE BANK
Figure 9-10 Secondary wave pattern
Unfortunately, much less is known when it comes to the wave heights, which have to
be determined experimentally. More details are given in RWS/DHL, 1988 and
Sorensen, 1973. In this book “wave heights” of secondary waves refer to the height of
the interference peaks, the cusps, as they are the dominant load. The wave height
greatly increases with the speed, reaching a theoretical maximum at Fr = 1. The sharp
increase of the wave height with the speed can be explained as follows: the limit speed
is similar to the sound barrier for airplanes. The energy from the engine can no longer
be transformed into speed, but the remainder must go somewhere. Hence, much fuel
is used to make waves. This explains why ships usually sail well under their limit
speed.
In relatively deep water, the wave height of the cusps diminishes with the cubic root
of the distance to the sailing line, which is again a good approximation for moderate
Fr-numbers (< 0.75).
Figure 9-11 gives experimental data from several sources, both from small-scale model
tests and full-scale tests. These data can be described with the following relation:
13
H s 4
S=¢|5| fF (9.9)
(i)
The coefficient of proportionality ¢ represents the ship's geometry, and s represents
the distance of the ship to the bank. It was found that the ship's length and its block
coefficient hardly influence the secondary waves. The draught, D, and the shape of the
bow dominate ¢ This is in line with the fact that the discontinuities in the hull of the


9. SHIPS 229
ship are responsible for the emission of pressure waves. ¢= 1.2 gives a reasonable
upper limit of the experimental data (see
Figure 9-11 and Table 9-1).

a
———
——
o, SS SS A a | |
ae ane
<= ‘ YT Ty
x ~ Experimental data 7
2. a
a
= hin 12 (omy F°
H/h = 1.2 (s/h)®® F0—
[oT SOT TT
of | er | | | |
of 02 03 04 05 060708091
— Fr
Figure 9-11 Secondary wave height measurements (from many sources)
Table 9-1 Values of ¢ as function of ship type (Van der Wal, 1990)
Type of ship value for S| ( validity range
(Er)

[uber 0 feos
inland vessel empiy [03801 fos07 |
inland vessel laden [0.75 [OT [03-05 |

[pusheomvey fos for foso7__|

[othertypes 08 04 0408

When more accurate data are needed, model tests can be carried out for a specific type
of ship.
The wave period also reaches its maximum at Fr = 1. The wave period and the wave-
length can be calculated as follows. As reasoned before, for Fr < 0.75 the secondary
waves are deep water waves. In that case (with c = vs cos ¢ and ¢ = 35°):
T 2 2
c= + 1 =cos35°v, = = 0.820, =
2a g g (9.10)
Model and prototype-measurements correspond well with this formula.


230 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Intermezzo 9-1 High-speed ferries
Recently, in several places in the world, high waves and the wake of a high speed ferry
speed ferries have come into operation. These usually do not cause any damage.
ships sail at supercritical speeds (Fr > 1).
Some phenomena then differ from the ones Due toa completely different shape of the hull
that were previously described above. These of high-speed ships, the relations as given in
phenomena are illustrated in the figure below. Figure 9-11 are not valid. In practice, the
wave height is of the same order of magnitude
The angle between the wave propagation line as with displacement ships sailing at moderate
and the sailing line is 35° for deep water speed (Fr < 0.75). The most striking
waves (Fr <0.75). When the speed of the ship difference is the wave propagation angle and
increases, transverse waves and diverging the wave period. The wave period reaches
waves will coincide and the angle becomes 0°: typical values of 10 s compared with 5 s for
the waves will travel in the same direction as displacement ships. This means that the
the ship. For Fr > 1, transverse waves no behaviour of these waves on banks differs
longer exist and the angle increases again, as considerably. The wave propagation angle is
the wave celerity, c, has reached a maximum _ similar to the stern wave in a primary wave. It
value (\gh), hence cos = c/v, decreases. The therefore seems justified to treat these waves
wave height and the period both have a in the same manner when it comes to stability
maximum around Fr = 1. The maximum load _ relations. At this moment general information
on banks is therefore reached when the ship on wave heights by these ships is lacking, so
accelerates or decelerates and Fr ~ 1. For measurements will be needed in cases where
cruising speed, when Fr > 1, the high speed ships play a role.
60 T
= aS ES
30
0)
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
Fr
9.2.4 Propeller wash
The flow behind a ship's propeller is very similar to flow in a circular jet, so it can be
expected that the same proportionalities are valid. This is not necessarily the case for
the numerical values, since there are also differences. For example, the water in the jet
is already turbulent because of the propeller blades; this will make the flow
establishment region shorter than in a free jet. Another difference is the water surface,
which will influence the divergence of the jet.
Figure 9-12 shows the turbulent velocity fluctuations in a free circular jet, compared
with the fluctuations in a propeller wash. The relative fluctuations in the fully
developed jet lie around 30% for both jets, but with the propeller this value is reached
much earlier. It can therefore be expected that the propeller jet will diverge more than
a free jet.


9. SHIPS 231
oa
03 —
3 a —propeler
al 7 a=-free et
on ~
/
°
o 1 2 3 4 8 6 7 8
xid
Figure 9-12 Turbulence in propeller wash and free circular jet (from RWS/DHL, 1988)
The jet properties can be described with expressions analogous to the relations for the
jets in Chapter 2:
2.81
Uy = “ 2
xid 2.81 -1s4£)
b=0.21x y= te (9.11)
> x/d
0. «(f)
u=U,e€ b
These expressions and Figure 9-13 show that a propeller jet indeed diverges faster than
a free circular jet. The width, b, is about twice the value in a free circular jet, see also
Chapter 2.
The values in these formulae can be estimated with: d equal to 0.7 times the propeller
diameter for a normal propeller and d equal to the propeller diameter for a propeller in
a jet tube. When the diameter of the propeller is not known, it can be estimated at about
70% of the ship's draught when unloaded, but usually such data is available. The
outflow velocity uo can be estimated with:
P 1/3
ug =1.15| —, (9.12)
pa
where P is the power of the engine (in W).
Analysis of a large number of inland navigation vessels indicated that usually the
installed power is a function of the dimensions of the ship:
P=0.66L:(2D+B) [kW] (9.13)


232 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
in which L is the length of the ship, D the draught and B the width of the ship. One
may obtain the 10% exceedance value by adding 25% to the mean expected power.
However, this equation has a large inaccuracy, see Figure 9-14.
———— — eee 1
SE ae rea
| OS 0.75
Soh LEVEN ET
3, CCU s LLY
5 EE propeller SSS y 5 /
1... free jet FEE EETERY ozs
me ee LVF ET RLNG
oon LUMI TT, i
1 10 100 05 03 01 01 03 05
x/d Ix
Figure 9-13 Velocity distributions in propeller wash and free jets
aon Prom = 1.25 Pmean
=
=
5
é 2000:
A
z
3 Pmean=0.66L(2D+8)
1000
0
oO 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 m
ship length * (2"draught+beam)

Figure 9-14 Relation between ship dimensions and installed power (main propeller)
When the location of the maximum or the distribution of the velocity on the bottom is
not important, the maximum velocity on the bottom up-max can be determined by
differentiating Equation (9.11) to x. This gives x = 5.6 r for the location of the
maximum velocity. This value in Equation (9.11) gives:

d
Up-max = 0.300 (9.14)
Zh
where 2; (=r in Equation (9.11)) is the vertical distance between the propeller axis
and the bottom. The number of propellers is 7.


9. SHIPS 233
Figure 9-15 shows the relation between Equation (9.11) and Equation (9.14) for
distances of 1 m and 10 m below a propeller of 1 m diameter and an engine power of
107 Watt.
i ee
— ——— ee
has
wa) | | hee
Bs | — ub max at 1m
EAT [| Ep smaxattom
24 ———
a a
a
N
2
| ile | |
1 ---- 5
se a
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Horizontal distance from propeller (m)
Figure 9-15 Velocities behind propeller for various cases
The velocities behind a ship's propeller are important in case the revetment or the
bottom can be attacked by this flow when the ship is stationary or is manoeuvring near
the bank. Once the ship is moving, this load becomes less important as the velocities
in the jet are compensated by the speed of the ship (in the ideal case the ship has a
velocity equal to uo while the jet remains motionless; compare a rocket at full speed).
In that case, an indication of the velocity at the bottom can be found by reducing the
values for u found with Equation (9.14) with the speed of the ship. RWS/DHL, 1988
recommends reduction with half the speed of the ship, which can be seen as a
conservative design approach:
Up =Up-max —0.5V5 (9.15)
For a bow thruster the maximum impact is on a side slope of the canal. The maximum
velocity occurs either at the same level of the centreline of the bow thruster or at a
point on a slope of 1:10 behind the propeller. This leads to the following equation:
max for upp <up and upp3 <Up (9.16)
ud
Uppy = 6.3 ——
bb
d
upg = 3.15 oe
Vbb2


234 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
4 Up =e oy
“pot
r Yo2
7 Yobt *i
Figure 9-16 Velocities behind a bow thruster
Fora vertical wall one may use:
yd 6.3uyd
upp =1.03 efor tupp3 <m <uy (9.17)
Nyy Yb3
where /ys is the distance between the centre of the bow thruster and the bottom of the
fairway and ysss the distance between the ship and the quay wall (RWS/DHL, 1988).
The relative turbulence intensity of bow thrusters is very high, order of 35 - 40%.
The relation of Equation (9.14) is not valid for bow thrusters. For bow thrusters the
width of the ship is not relevant, the power is a function of the lateral resistance LxD:
P=A(L-D)+A, [kW] (9.18)

Curve fitting on the basis of the existing fleet (2010) gives the following values for
‘Av and Ao:

Tnland navigation fleet (2010) Al A2 [kW]

Container vessel 2.00 250

General cargo vessel 175 —150

Tankers 0.80 +100

Cruise liners 0.00 1275
In order to obtain the 10% exceedance value, one may increase the expected value with
175 kW.


SSS SHIP
9.3 Stability
9.3.1 Primary waves
Banks are loaded by primary waves in two ways: by the return flow, u:, and by the
stern wave, Zmax. With regard to a stone on the bank, the return flow first accelerates
and then decelerates again. In Chapter 3 we have seen two possible stability
approaches, Shields and Izbash, the first of which is hard to apply, since the transition
from velocity to shear stress is very difficult. Therefore an Izbash-type relation (the
adapted version, Equation (3.19)) is used, while a higher relative turbulence intensity:
2
u,(1+3r
Ad,,so = 0.47 (ue +39) (9.19)
2gKka

The relative turbulence intensity in a return current is in order three times larger than
the turbulence over a normal bed. RWS/DHL, 1988 recommends to use for return
currents a value of r = 0.2. For stability in the stern wave, RWS/DHL, 1988
recommends, based on experimental data:

max <1 cota (9.20)

Adyso
This equation is practically identical to Hudson’s formula given in Chapter 8. The stern
wave usually leads to larger stone sizes than the return flow. The slope as a whole has
to be protected against damages caused by the return flow. The upper part also has to
be protected against the stern wave (and the secondary waves, see next section). The
height of this part should be (2-3) x zmax around the water level.
9.3.2 Secondary waves
Again, only limited experimental data are available for a design formula. RWS/DHL,
1988 recommends a formula which is similar to the equation by Van der
Meer. ’Similar” does not mean the same, since the wave height used in Van der Meer
is Hs.
This means that there are many waves higher than H, (see Chapter 7).
‘A secondary wave train contains a limited number of waves and H in Equation (9.9)
represents the maximum wave height (see also Figure 9-2). When the plunging part of
the Van der Meer equation, see Chapter 8, is used with P = 0.1 (revetment), $= 2 (little
damage) and N = 7000 (ship loads are usually very frequent, hence the maximum
number of waves), it appears that instead of Hs, 1.4Hs has to be used to obtain the same
results presented in RWS/DHL,1988. The stability equation finally becomes:


236 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
HAcos55° 05
Ta 2nd (9.21)
Adyso
where 55° is the angle of approach of the waves to the bank. According to Van der
Wal (1990) the constant c2na is a function of the bank slope:
Cond = 1.6(cot ar)? = 9.22
“ond = 1.6(cot @) O(Cnq) = 0.3 (9.22)
The protection against secondary waves should reach from about (2-3)xH below water
level to about (2-3)xH above water level.
Example 9-1
A ship with a width of 10 m and a draught of 3 m is sailing in a canal, 40 m wide and 5m
deep. The banks have a slope of 1:3 (the depth is the corrected depth according to Figure
9-8). What stone class is needed to protect the banks?
Firstly, we have to find the limit speed for this ship in this canal. Av/Ac = 10x3/40x5 = 0.15.
Either iterating with Equation (9.4) or reading from Figure 9-4 we find Vix 0.55x\gh ~ 3.8
mis. The design speed will then be about 0.93.8 = 3.4 m/s. Iterating with Equation (9.5) or
directly from Figure 9-6 we find z ~ 0.083xh ~ 0.42 m. We assume further that the ship is
sailing 10 m from the bank, hence, y = 5 m (see Figure 9-8) leading to a stern wave
(Equations (9.7) and (9.8) Zmax= 1.5x(1#2x5/40)x0.42 = 0.78 m. The return current is found
in a similar way: ur ~ 0.15xVgh ~ 1.04 m/s. Due to the eccentricity this becomes
(1+5/40)x1.04 = 1.17 mls. The secondary waves can be calculated from Equation (9.9): H
= 1.2xhx(s/h)°xvAl(gh)? = 1.2x5x(10/5)°"93.44/(10x5)? = 0.27 m. The wave period
becomes 1.8 s (Equation (9.10)).
The next step is to determine the stone classes that match these loads. For the stern wave
in the canal we need (see Equation (9.20)): dhso = 0.78/(1.65x1.8x3°%) = 0.18 m
corresponding with 10-60 kg. For the return flow we find (Equation (9.19) with tang= 1): dhso
= 1.21.17? | (1.65%2x9.81x\(1-(0.31/0.70)?))=1.2689/(38.81"1(0.80)) ~ 0.06 m. For the
secondary waves (Equation (9.21)) the load leads to dso = Hx / (1.65%3.6) ~ 0.06 m. It is
obvious that the stern wave in this case dominates the load. When the waterway becomes
much wider, the limit speed will be higher, the water-level depression will be smaller and
(due to the higher limit speed) the secondary waves will be higher. On inland waterways,
the primary wave is often dominant, while in estuaries and lakes the secondary waves can
be dominant.
9.3.3. Propeller wash
The flow in a jet is very turbulent, see Figure 9-12. Values for the relative turbulence
are three times higher than in uniform flow (compare Figure 2-5 with Figure 9-12).
For stability in the jet flow of a propeller, also an Izbash type of equation is used:


9. SHIPS 237
2
Adysy = 0.47 (uel +3r)) (9.23)
29K y
RWS/DHL, 1988 recommend to use in this case a relative turbulence intensity of r=
0.45. Also values up to r = 0.5 have been measured (Van Doorn, 2012). This value is
based on the assumption that some transport is acceptable (in terms of the Shields-
parameter, ye = 0.045). When hardly any transport is accepted (yc = 0.03), the relative
turbulence intensity should be in the order of 0.7, giving a diameter almost 8 times that
for uniform flow! This will lead to very large stones and one should question whether
such a no-damage criterion is realistic, since the propeller load moves and is only
short-lived at a certain location.
£1
om +--+ r= 0,045
8 ---r=0.20
Zz 4 r=0.45
5 —r=0.70
o .
=
$05 . -
2 i songs
Zo een eee
0 1 2 3
near bed velocity (m/s)
Figure 9-17 relation between stone size, near bed velocity and relative turbulence intensity
Of course the slope correction factor becomes | for a bottom protection.
Example 9-2
The same ship as in Example 9-1 (width is 10 m, depth is 3 m) is moored at a jetty. The
engine has a power of 1000 kW and a propeller with a diameter of 1.4 m. The propeller axis
is situated about 1.5 m above the bottom. Which stone class is needed to protect the bottom
at this jetty?
The effective (jet) diameter for a normal propeller is about 70 % of the real diameter = 1 m.
With Equation (9.12) we find for the outflow velocity uo = 1.15 x (109/1000«12)?5 = 11.2 mis.
With Equation (9.14) this leads to a velocity at the bottom, Us = 0.3x11.2x1/1.5 = 2.25 mis.
With Equation (9.23) this leads to a stone Adnso = 0.47x(2.25x(1+3x0.45))? /(2x9.81x1) ~
0.66, so dhso = 0.66/1.65 = 0.40 m corresponding to stone class 60-300 kg.
The size of the stone increase considerably when decreasing the waterdepth. By making a
number of calculations with various waterdepth the optimal waterdepth can be found. In
case of a very shallow channel depth a large stone is needed, and consequently the sand
bed has to be lowered considerably in order to place the big stones required. In the graph
a calculation is made for waterdepth from 4 to 7 m. The required stone size decreases from


238 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
3.5 m to 10 cm. The layer of this bed protection (= 2 dso) varies from 7 m to 20 cm. The
optimal depth of the channel is in the order of 5 m.
15
S
3
=
=
A fo
3 \
2 10
g
a
Ze
5
3
z |
3s 5
2
F-}
&
=
3 ‘\
3 Me
0
4 5 6 7
free depth of channel (m)
9.4 Erosion
% ;
h / o i¢
original profile Sigg sbcaaescetenchGe
— erosion profile
hi due to waves
0
erosion profile due
to return current
f_-—
Figure 9-18 Erosion profile in navigation channel due to return current and waves.
For erosion due to ships hardly any data is available. For waves, the approach in
chapter 8 could be used, where the slope erosion was determined as a function of
incident wave height and sand grain diameter. For erosion due to return currents, the
approach by Ven Te Chow, 1959 for irrigation canals, which assumes an equal
distribution of the shear stress along the bank, can be used. This leads to (see also
Figure 9-18):


9. SHIPS 239
h=hy cos | tan(y) 2 (9.24)
Io
There is, however, only qualitative evidence that these relations are also valid in
navigation channels.
= : a a a ee ee .
( Oe Z usu, a
original bottom A a h, et
Figure 9-19 Bottom erosion due to propeller wash
For bottom erosion in a propeller wash, Equation (9.11) can be used to determine the
scouring depth by equating w to u. of the bottom material. In this equation, uv, is the
average velocity in the jet. The extra turbulence is taken into account by applying the
multiplier that comes from the stability relation in a propeller wash, see Section 9.3.3.
A comparison between Equation (3.4) and Equation (9.19) shows that the necessary
diameter in a jet is about 4 times greater than in normal flow. A 4 times larger diameter
means a 2 times larger velocity load, hence the factor in the jet Equation (9.11)
becomes 5.6 instead of 2.8. Every location in the jet where w= we can now be computed
from:
in{ ek
n= xi} 2504) (9.25)
=x -2z .
. 15.7 b
where h, + 2) =r in Equation (9.11). Figure 9-19 clarifies the approach. Again, there
is no experimental evidence to confirm this equation. It should therefore be used
carefully as an indication of the necessity of a protection.
9.5 Summary
This chapter deals with the design of protections against ship loads in waterways. The
loads due to ships show many similarities with loads presented in the previous
chapters on flow and waves. The loads in this chapter are divided into three types: the
primary wave, related to the length of the ship, the secondary waves, related to the
shape of the bow of the ship, and the propeller wash, related to the propulsion of the
ship.
The limit speed of a ship is important for the design of protections. It depends on the
length of the ship, the waterdepth and the blockage of the waterway. Figure 9-5 gives


240 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

an overview of these relations. For the design of protections it is recommended to
assume a value of 90% of the limit speed.

The primary wave is dominant in relatively small waterways where the blockage of the
cross-section by ships is not negligible (which can already be the case when the
blockage is about 10%). Within the primary wave, the stern wave usually gives the
most severe attack on the banks of the waterways. Expressions are given to compute
the height of the stern wave from the characteristics of ship and waterway, see Section
9.2.2. Equation (9.20) gives the relation between the stern wave and the necessary
stone dimensions.

The secondary waves are dominant when blockage does not play a role. Their
magnitude depends much more on the shape of the bow than on the draught or length
of the ship. Equation (9.9) gives an upper limit of the wave height that can be expected.
The angle of approach to the banks is more or less constant (55°) for displacement
ships. Equation (9.21) gives a simple relation for the stability of stones in secondary
waves.

The propeller wash plays an important role at locations where ships manoeuvre at low
velocities. The flow in that situation can be approximated with the same kind of
relation as used for a circular jet. Equation (9.23) gives the relation between the
velocity at the bottom (from Equations (9.14) or (9.15) and the stone size.

At present, very little is known about erosion due to ship motion. Section 9.4 gives
some advice on how to get a first impression of the possible erosion on unprotected
banks and bottoms.


CS eS
== ae s Z
3. 2S ee re | Se
SS eet” 6 Fae
ie aor —"
— ee
. — = 2 =
i RS, ae
oe ee PSEERN See
foe. E : =
Se Se
See SS
= = Bes. SRR
=e . oN . eS
=< le
ae a = es
eee eT
2 NG) . Ee SSS
Sa ‘ SESS !
a < BS WAS
“S*8on ae IH Taos = a 2
3h Se. ks SS ay aS a
i an Sa SS
oe ao] Pm eee me WL a
iy = reek ee ~, See a
ee SE Ses OA
SS Nan REA Ny
=] ZoIreE RS iss
= 2 ’ & ete Se Sy agabes
ee ies . 7 cers — ¥
<<. 4 ee TN Sw Ss
a ae) ORS Et SS ‘ % KS 8
, ie = se : ow
iM uF any e&, TAN
tas We NB
= SS ~ ee MEY LRR
¥ . ES ass Sa
es . ~y % xX q
Dice block on the breakwater of Hook of Holland
(4000-018 Bart van Eyck Beeldbank Rijkswaterstaat)


242 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
10.1 General
In the previous chapters, many relations between load and strength have been
presented. This chapter focuses on how to deal with the variations in loads as
encountered in nature and with the strengths of structures which also show variations
and which decreases after construction. Maintenance and repair are therefore
important to maintain the strength of a structure in time.
® strength 2 \ ©
8
extreme load
failure
normal load
risk
0123456789 construction —
——> years —— strength
Figure 10-1 Failure, risk and costs
Figure 10-la shows the eventual destiny of any structure without maintenance. The
strength decreases due to wear and tear, erosion or fatigue. The load has a random
nature and there is a probability that, at some moment, the load will exceed the strength
and that the structure will collapse, crack or fail. Figure 10-1b shows the idea behind
an economic design: a very strong structure runs little risk of failure but is expensive,
while a less strong structure is cheaper but the risk is high. Somewhere in between,
there is an optimum. Although very logical and simple, it is hard to quantify this into
workable numbers.
The risk of failure can be expressed in general terms:
Risk = probability x consequence (10.1)
in which the probability (a number between 0 and 1) can be expressed as probability
per year and the consequence can be expressed as loss of money and/or human lifes,
hence the unit of risk is loss per year. To keep the risk acceptably low, an event with a
large consequence should have a low probability. Section 10.2 gives more details.
The consequence is related to the choice of the limit state in the failure analysis. As
already said in chapter 1, a distinction is made between the Serviceability Limit State
(SLS) and the Ultimate Limit State (ULS). The ULS defines collapse or such
deformation that the structure as a whole can no longer perform its main task. It is
usually related to extreme load conditions. The SLS defines a partly or temporarily
unusable state of structure. In the case of a harbour, the SLS could represent such wave
penetration that transshipment of goods is impossible, while the ULS could be the
collapse of a breakwater. The choice of the SLS is less clear e.g. for a bottom or dike


10. DIMENSIONS 243
protection. In Vrijling et al., 1992, the SLS is seen as the deterioration of strength under
persistent loads. In the light of Equation (10.1) it is obvious that the probability of
reaching a ULS should be much lower than reaching an SLS. In the example of the
harbour Psis = I/year and Puts = 0.01 /year. Section 10.3 goes into more details
concerning maintenance policies and the relation between the SLS and maintenance.

2| ® | ©

3 3

5 5

3 $s

| 2 1 3 | 1

————» load ————> time
Figure 10-2 Differences in structural behaviour

When an acceptable probability needs to be determined, the behaviour of the structure
and the material is important. Figure 10-2a shows the damage as a function of load,
given a certain loading period. Line | represents the "normal" behaviour of rock under
waves or flow. Line 2 is valid for a relatively thin layer of the same rock with a filter
layer of much finer material underneath. Besides removal of the top layer, this leads
to a large increase of damage and further deterioration depending on what is behind
the filter. Line 3 may hold for a block revetment with clamping forces. Up to a certain
load, the blocks are lifted somewhat, but there is no real damage. Beyond a certain
level, the load causes a sudden instability and a complete row of blocks can be
removed.
Figure 10-2b is similar to Figure 10-2a, but shows the damage as a function of time
given a certain load. Line | is the behaviour found for rock under waves or current. In
the Van der Meer formulas, the number of waves influences on the damage (S x VN)
more or less according to line 1. In the Van der Meer relations, the number of waves
is limited to a maximum of about 10000 since in experiments the damage hardly
increases beyond that number. Line 2 may be valid for an asphalt revetment which is
lifted by water pressure. Afier some time, due to the plastic behaviour of asphalt, the
deformation suddenly increases and even rupture of the material is possible.
Ina probabilistic analysis, some of the above-mentioned properties can be included in
the distributions of strength and load. In many cases, however, these peculiarities are
handled with "engineering judgment", a strange mixture of experience, common sense
and intuition, often leading to keeping a safe margin. A designer must always foresee
the consequences of a failure. Thinking about failure mechanisms is therefore
important, as will be treated in Section 10.4.


244 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

10.2 Probabilistics

10.2.1 Introduction

It is impossible or uneconomical to make a structure so strong that it will never fail. A
hydraulic engineer’s task is therefore to design structures with an acceptable risk of
failure. In terms of load and strength, this means that the probability that the load
exceeds the strength should remain below a certain value. This value depends on the
consequences, see again Equation (10.1). It is possible to express load and strength in
a limit state function Z:

Z= Strength - Load = R = S = R(x1,x2, «.. Xm) — Smet, «- Xn) (10.2)
where R is the strength and S the load and x7;...Xm....%» represent all random variables
involved in strength and load (like wave height, wave period, stone diameter, slope
angle etc.). S as a symbol for load and not for strength does not seem logical, but this
is according to international agreement. R and S are acronyms related to the French
words Résistance and Sollicitation ("asking"). We will stay in line with this
agreement, despite the confusion at first glance.

total volume = 1 Z=0
total area = 1 iy
i : Cy ee
Pret Tg
Pr<— | Prmax+ Psmax |
: z<0
strength (R) ‘
Ps | —— load (S)
total area = 1
Psmax .
Figure 10-3 Probability mountain
Figure 10-3 gives the probability density distributions of load and strength (ps and pr,
respectively). When R = S (Z = 0), the structure (or part of it, depending on the scope
of Z) reaches the limit state as defined with Z. A three-dimensional representation of
the probability distributions is most appropriate, as, theoretically, for every load S there
is a R < S and, the other way around, for every strength R there is a S > R. So, the
combination of probabilities of Z < 0 determines the total probability of failure: Pr.


10. DIMENSIONS 245
Pris the volume of the part of the "probability mountain" (of which the contour lines
have been drawn in the figure) where Z <0. This volume is given by:
Pe=P(Z<0)= ff ~[py(x) dn.dr, (10.3)
Z(x)<0
where x, ...... Xn again represent all parameters involved. Every parameter has its own
probability distribution and the determination of Pr can lead to very complex and
labour-intensive computations. Finding reliable probability functions for every
parameter is also a difficult and time consuming process.
Intermezzo 10-1
‘Some history
Dikes in The Netherlands are much older than However, it took another disaster in 1953 to
probabilistic design methods. The height of a affect decision making. No maximum wind
dike was always related to the "highest water velocity or rainfall is known in nature, hence,
level ever", the locally registered maximum there is no maximum water level due to storm
water level in history. Whenever the surges or river discharges either. A
maximum registered water level was _ probabilistic approach is the only way to deal
exceeded a new “highest water level ever" with loads in nature. In structural engineering
could be defined. This went on for many the situation is somewhat different. The
centuries and people lived with these ways of maximum load on a bridge can be influenced
life. In a modern society, where man tries toby regulations e.g. by means of the maximum
minimize risks, this is highly unsatisfactory. permissible loading capacity of trucks, But
In 1939 the knowledge of statistics led to the even then uncertainties remain. What is the
awareness that higher water levels would probability of an overloaded truck crossing
always be possible, but with a lower the bridge or what will the future intensity of
probability (see Wemelsfelder, 1939). heavy loaded trucks be in relation to fatigue
of the bridge material?
Four different levels of the probabilistic design approach can be discerned:
© Level III: fully probabilistic approach
Pris determined by means of numerical integration of the probability functions
in Equation (10.3) or by means of randomly drawn realisations of these
functions ("Monte Carlo" approach), see Section 10.2.3.
Level II: approximate probabilistic approach
Pris approached by means of simplified functions, see Section 10.2.4.
© Level I: quasi-probabilistic approach
For every parameter involved in load or strength a partial safety factor is used,
e.g. one derived from a level II computation, see Section 10.2.5.
e Level 0: deterministic approach
Some maximum load and minimum strength is taken based on experience
and/or intuition (see Intermezzo 10-1) and one overall "safety factor" is
applied. It will be clear that this is not a probabilistic approach at all. An overall
safety coefficient, y, usually says nothing about the safety, see Figure 10-4,


246 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
where y is the same for both cases, but Pr is completely different. Good
engineering judgement requires a larger y when the variation is larger.
'S Sue Raw 'R=7S 's IR=yS
Figure 10-4 Equal overall safety coefficient with different probability distributions
Another approach can be to work with characteristic values for load and
strength, with a small chance that these values are too low or too high, see
Figure 10-4. But even then, if the distribution of the extreme values is not
known, the real meaning of yis uncertain.
10.2.2 Comparison of methods
To illustrate the use of a traditional deterministic approach compared with the various
levels of probabilistic approach, the following example are used, see Figure 10-5. A
building is situated in the vicinity of the coastline and is protected by a rip-rap
revetment, sufficiently high and including filter layers and a toe protection.
—, BEREE
Figure 10-5 Example structure for comparison of probabilistic and deterministic approach
The idea is the following. Firstly, a design is made with a "traditional" deterministic
approach (level 0). A characteristic wave height is chosen from the available wave
observations and the threshold of motion is taken as a characteristic strength.
Subsequently, a fully probabilistic method (level III) is used to show what is a more
realistic approach. Next, the results of level II and level I methods are shown to
illustrate the merits of these methods. Finally, a level 0 approach is applied again, using
the results of the probabilistic methods, showing that common sense always pays. The
example is simple and is meant as an educational tool, not as a practical application.
Ten years of wave observations are available, see Table 10-1. Only waves > 0.5 m
have been processed, as they are representative for "storms", lasting several hours. In
these ten years, the highest recorded wave height was 1.62 m.
Table 10-1
Wave height | Occurrencesin | Exceedances | Retum period
interval (m) 10 years in 10 years (yrs)
05106 [i
061-07


10. DIMENSIONS 247
[ores a
0.81-0.9
ooo [4p
[horny pt
a
EE
SE
a
Deterministic approach
With the highest recorded wave height, the stone size for the top layer is calculated
with the Van der Meer formula, see Chapter 8:
H,€°°
4,50 = ts 02 (10.4)
A6.2P® (4)
vv
Swell does not play a role at this coast, so for the wave steepness a value of 0.05 can
be used. With a slope angle of 1:4 this means that only the plunging part of the
formulas has to be used. The permeability, P, for a revetment on sand = 0.1, A= 1.6
and the number of waves, N, is 7000 (maximum). The damage number, 5 =2 is chosen,
as it is representative for the threshold of motion. This leads to dso = 0.56 m and a
choice of rock class 300-1000 kg (dhso = 0.6 m).
This can be seen as an example of a classical deterministic approach. Now, several
probabilistic methods will be used to establish the risk of failure of this structure.
Probabilistic approach
Probabilistic calculations by hand are nearly impossible. Software packages for
executing probabilistic computations are available, e.g. the VaP package from ETH
Ziivich (Petschacher, 1994), Matlab-scripts for probabilistic computations (Den Heijer,
2012), or Pro2@B from the TNO institute (Courage & Steenbergen, 2007).
In a probabilistic approach, a limit-state function has to be defined. For this example
the Van der Meer relation is rewritten:
S 0.2 H
Z=c as =) E05 Ase (10.5)
” VN Adnso
Note that it is not strictly necessary to separate strength and load factors. If this Z-
function < 0, the structure fails. With the values from the deterministic approach we
find Z = 0.15, slightly positive since we used a larger stone (0.6 instead of 0.56 m).


248 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Probability distributions for all parameters are used in the computation of the total
probability. So, firstly, these distributions have to be estimated. The wave height
distribution is determined from the available wave observations, see Table 10-1 and
Figure 10-6.
ca
20 l LT |
SUM UM TM Il
r15 nM |
Cn ETI TTI
10 AT
0.0 UI ETT ETT ETT
0.1 1 10 100 1000
——— _ return period (years)
Figure 10-6 Long-term wave height distribution
In Chapter 7 (Appendix 7.7.2) wave statistics were given for an irregular wave field.
Such a wave field could be represented by the significant wave height, H,, while the
wave heights in a registration were described with a Rayleigh-distribution. So, Hs
represents the wave condition at a certain moment, or better for a short period of one
or more hours and the Rayleigh-distribution can be seen as the short term wave height
distribution. All registered values of H, give a distribution for the long term. This
distribution is normally described with a Weibull-distribution, but often an exponential
distribution gives reasonable results. Figure 10-6 shows an exponential distribution.
This distribution has to be described mathematically to be used as input for the
probabilistic model.
The general expressions for the exponential distribution are:
f(x) = Aexp(-A(x-e)) > F(x) =1 = exp(-A(x-e)) > (1- F(x) a exp(-A(x-<))
probability density probability Y <x return period
(10.6)
Note: the function is defined only for x > & since negative probabilities are impossible,
see second Equation in (10.6).
Figure 10-6 gives the return period of the wave heights, so the parameters 4 and ¢ have
to be derived from the third equation of (10.6). This can be done by taking two values
of the line in Figure 10-6, e.g. for return periods of 1 and 10 years:


10. DIMENSIONS 249
_ All-e) -~n — Ie
l=e > Inl=0= A-he ys eal, 4-383 (10.7)
10=e46") _, Inl0=2.3=1.6A-2e

For dnso, A, tana and s, a normal distribution is assumed. The mean values for these
parameters are equal to the ones used in the deterministic approach: 0.6 m, 1.6, 0.25
and 0.05, respectively. The standard deviations are estimated as: 0.05 m, 0.1, 0.0125
and 0.01, respectively. P is assumed to have a log-normal distribution, to avoid errors
caused by negative values of P in the calculation. The mean value is 0.1 and the
standard deviation is 0.05. N is given a deterministic value of 7000. The constant 6.2
in equation (8.8) is in fact not really constant, it is the curve fitting value. The line with
Cpt = 6.2 is the best fit, but it means that 50% of all observations are above this line.
For design it is therefore often advised to use a line which includes 95% of the
observations. This can be achieved by using a value of cp; = 5.5. The average value of
cplis 6.2, and the standard deviation is 0.45.
Note: The normal distribution for dyso is not a distribution curve within a stone class
(e.g. a sieve curve). It represents the deviations in characteristic diameter for a whole
mass of stones. Compare the Rayleigh-distribution within a wave record
(characterized by Hs) and the long-term distribution of Hs. See also Intermezzo A1.
10.2.3 Level Ill
Numerical integration of Z is one of the available level III methods but will not be used
here. Another method is the Monte Carlo method. The basis of this method is quite
simple, see Figure 10-7. For all parameters, a random number is drawn, taking into
account the probability distribution. This means that a value with a high probability
density will appear more often. So, after many draws, the histogram of a normally
distributed parameter will show the well-known Gauss-shape.
When all parameters have a value, the resulting value for Z is computed from Equation
(10.5). This whole procedure is repeated N times after which Pr simply is Nr/N (Nr
being the number of times that Z < 0). The procedure is simple but the number of
repetitions is very high, which makes the Monte Carlo method a computer job par
excellence.


250 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
draw z= es -
a
yes i<N no
2
Figure 10-7 Procedure of Monte Carlo method

Computations with S = 2
Figure 10-8 shows two realisations of the Monte Carlo procedure for S'= 2, resulting
in Pr = 0.095 and 0.091, respectively. The number of draws, N, determines the
accuracy of the method. A rough estimate of the necessary value of N is: N > 400/Pr,
so N has to be checked after Pr has been determined. An average, after three
calculations, Pr = 0.094, which is the probability per year since the wave heights have
been introduced as numbers of exceedance per year, see Figure 10-6. This value seems
logical: the deterministic design was made with a 1/10 year wave (which has a
probability of exceedance in one year ~ 0.1) and a slightly larger stone was chosen
(diso = 0.6 instead of 0.56 m).

a 7 — L

H 1 2
ws 6 3 sor Pie
the Fai
| a
a : | T ~~ L
on SHAT HANA OUOUOUEUORLEOSE=s OL OLOLOLOVELERE
si SS
Figure 10-8 Realisations of Monte Carlo simulation

S=2 was used in the deterministic approach. This can be seen as a Serviceability Limit
State (SLS), beyond which some repair can be necessary. So, there is a 10% chance
per year that some damage to the revetment will occur. This result is not really
astonishing. But how safe is our building really? To judge the safety, it is necessary to
determine the probability of damage to the building. This requires determination of the
Ultimate Limit State (ULS).
Computations with S = 10
The ULS will be approximated here simply with § = 10. The reason for this is as
follows: $= 10 indicates the damage when the top layer (which is about 2-d,50 thick)
has been removed completely. Once the top layer removed, the filter layers, which


10. DIMENSIONS: 251
have much less resistance against wave loads, will be removed as well. Underneath
the revetment there is only sand. Equation (8.2) gives an idea of how far the coast will
erode. With a wave of 1.6 m and fine sand, this will be about 40 m. This means collapse
of the building near the shore. Implicitly it is assumed that the storm lasts for several
hours, which is reasonable. So, although roughly, $ = 10 can indeed be seen as total
failure.

The Monte Carlo simulation for S=10, with all other parameters equal to those in the
previous case, gives Pr = 0.011. So there is a 1% chance per year of total collapse of
the building. Is this a problem? The lifetime of a building is normally many decades,
say 50 years. The probability of collapse is then given by:
Pp in SOyears =1—(1— P/year)”? = 0.42 (10.8)
So, there is almost a 50% chance that this building will be destroyed during its lifetime!
Itshould also be noted that even the best maintenance policy can not prevent this, since
a storm that causes a damage level of 10 will also do so when the armour layer is still
completely intact. The capitalized risk is:
1 50
50 1 I- f iar }
R=>' PeD —z = Pp D (10.9)
nal (l+r) r
in which D is the total damage and r is the interest rate. D, (including the economic
activities related to the building) when S= 10 is set to 10-10° € and ris assumed to be
5%, The capitalized risk is then 0.011-10-10% 18.25 = 2-108 €.
The final answer to this dilemma has to come from econometric considerations. These
considerations are presented very simply. Revetments with various strength will be
compared with a focus on costs and risk. For the involved risk, Table 10-2 gives the
results of Monte Carlo computations and Equation (10.9):
Table 10-2
kg) (m) (6) © (10°€)
[60-300 | 04 [0189 0.999 84S
[300-1000 | 06 | oor Toa 20
This has to be compared with the costs of the different revetments. Again, some simple
assumptions will be made. The length of bank necessary to protect the building is
assumed to be 200 m. The evolved length of the protection along the slope of the bank


252 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
directly follows from the geometry of Figure 10-5: V(6? + 242) ~ 25 m. The layer is
taken 2-d,s0 thick. Only the costs of the top layer are different and one extra filter layer
for the largest stone classes is needed. The costs of the other activities to construct the
revetment (excavating, creating slope, filter layers, toe protection) are assumed to be
1-106 € for all revetments. Table 10-3 gives the costs:
Table 10-3
Armour layer | Cost per | Volume | Costs extra | Costs (incl. | Total costs
(kg) m’ (€) (m) filter layer | extra filter) revetment
(10° €) (10° €) (3)
@= 300 qo [0 [008 [108 |
300-1000 6000 [0a a]
10003000 9000
30006000 T1500
The difference in costs is small: the initial costs to construct the revetment (1-105 €)
are dominant. Comparison of costs and risks now shows the following picture, see
Figure 10-9. It is obvious that stone class 1000-3000 kg instead of 300-1000 kg is a
good choice, since the risk decreases with a factor 10 for just a small amount. Another
solution could be a thicker top layer, permitting a larger S before the structure is
endangered.
risk ---Q--;
30 | stone class
total costs ‘
o ‘ 9 2 2
/ 2\ ¢s 8
2 20 g Ss 5 8
a oa WV 2 _
8 s ile 3 8
fa gi\8 8 8
construction |
o |_wosts —.—.—- =O =
Figure 10-9 Risk and costs for various top layers
This choice becomes completely different when there is no expensive building directly
on the shore. For example, if there is a protection, only to prevent further meandering
of an estuary channel, the cost-risk ratio is completely different and the deterministic
approach of Section 10.2.2 is perfectly adequate (see also the evaluation in Section
10.2.6).
10.2.4 Level Il
The probabilistic level II approach is a collective term for approximate solutions of the
failure probability by means of linearization around a well-chosen point, the so-called
design point. The limit-state function, Z, is described with a normal distribution just
like all parameters that make up Z. This means that a deviating distribution of a


10. DIMENSIONS: 253
parameter will be replaced by a normal distribution, which has the same value and
slope in the design point as the original probability function. The failure probability,
finally, is determined from the properties of the normally distributed Z-function, juz
and oz via, see also Figure 10-10:

paz (10.10)
OZ
The failure probability Pr and fare directly related in the normal distribution and can
be found in standard tables. So, if # can be derived from the known parameter
distributions, Pr can also be known.
' i — 2
Z=0 Uz
Figure 10-10 Failure probability in level Il approach
The design point is the point on the line Z= 0 where the probability density of the
combination of load and strength has its maximum. When a structure fails, load and
strength will probably have values near the design point values. The distance between
the average value of a parameter and its design value is an indication of its importance
with regard to oyand, hence, to the failure probability of the structure. This importance
is indicated with @ for each parameter. Appendix 10.6 can serve as an explanation if
the procedure is not clear.
The VaP results for the original Z-function, Equation (10.5), are shown in Table 10.4.
The influence of the wave height variation on the failure probability is clearly
dominant. This is often the case; the load variations are more important than the
strength variations.
Comparing the failure probability from the level Il-analysis with the results of the
Monte Carlo approach of Section 10.2.3 gives an idea of the reliability of the level II
method as a whole. P~ 0.011 is found with the Monte Carlo approach compared with
Pr = 0.01 from the level II approach. A difference of 10% is acceptable, since
computations like this only serve to obtain an indication of the failure probability.
The advantage of a level II method is the resulting i-values, which indicate the
relative importance of a parameter in the total failure probability. The combination of
a large oj and a large power in the Z-function lead to a high a-value for a parameter.
So, with good engineering judgement, a large a-value does not come as a surprise and
an engineer intuitively chooses a conservative value for such a parameter.


254 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Table 10-4

[ats 008 ss
a
10.2.5 Level |

A level I approach adds nothing new to what has been said above. It is actually an
application of the results of a higher-level method, especially level II methods. The
approach requires a design value and a safety coefficient to be established for every
parameter. The safety coefficients are derived from a level II computation, using the
a-values and #-value. The #-value stands for the required safety and the @-values stand
for the relative importance of each parameter. The partial safety coefficient for each
parameter is then given by:

ya uiba. (10.11)
Hi

a-values are negative for loads and positive for strength, leading to y> 1 for loads and
<1 for strengths when used as a multiplier in both cases. Other definitions are possible
and can be found in literature. The safety factors in Equation (10.11) are defined with
regard to the average values. When using other characteristic values, the safety factor
changes correspondingly. This approach can be seen as the application of engineering
judgement as mentioned in the previous section.

10.2.6 Evaluation

In Section 10.2.2 we started with a deterministic approach and compared the result
with various levels of probabilistic methods. A deterministic method results in a
certain strength (in the example the necessary stone class), given a certain load (in the
example the wave height). A probabilistic approach results in a failure probability,
given the distributions of load and strength. So, a probabilistic method never leads
directly to dimensions for a structure. Given an acceptable failure probability, the
dimensions have to be determined iteratively.

The risk analysis in Section 10.2.3 showed that the deterministic approach led to an
unacceptable high risk in the case of a building near the shore line. Would it have been
possible to avoid this high risk without sophisticated probability models?


10. DIMENSIONS 255
The deterministic approach was based on a wave height with a return period of 10
years and a low damage level, S = 2. From the risk analysis it became clear that the
real issue is an acceptable low probability of failure of the building, equivalent to $=
10. Comparing the cost of a revetment, which is in the order of magnitude of 0.5 mln
€, with the risk of collapse of a building of 5 min €, the failure probability should be
less than 10% during the lifetime of the building, which is about 50 years, say 5%. A
convenient formula to deal with this issue is the Poisson-equation, which is an
approximation of Equation (10.8):
P=l1-exp(-fT) (10.12)
in which: +P = probability of occurrence of an event one or more times in period T
T= considered period in years
f= average frequency of the event per year

For P= 0.05 and T= 50 years we find f= 1/1000. In other words: a wave height with
a return period of 1000 years should be used. From Figure 10-6 we find: H, = 2.8 m.
With S = 10 in Equation (10.4), this gives: d)so ~ 0.7 m. This would lead to a stone
class 1000-3000 kg instead of 300-1000 kg. The same procedure could be applied to
the maintenance. In that case a 10% chance of failure (SLS) or, in other words, the
need for maintenance, is reasonable. This would lead to the same calculation as carried
out in the deterministic approach of Section 10.2.2 (once in 10 years wave height and
S= 2). In this case, however, the ULS is dominant. In the case where there is not an
expensive building on the shore, maintenance is the only criterion.
The Poisson Equation (10.12) combined with common sense as outlined above can
be seen as a semi-probabilistic approach which can serve as a very useful tool in a
preliminary design.
Of course, to establish the dimensions of a complex and important structure, like a
storm surge barrier to protect a large and densely populated area, a probabilistic
approach is an important design tool. Since probabilistic computations can only be
done with some given structure, deterministic calculations are always carried out first
and the final dimensions result from iteration between both approaches. A level III
method is the best way to determine the failure probability. Level II methods are useful
to get an insight into the relative importance of the various parameters involved.
Equation (10.12) can also be used to show other elementary statistical aspects:
¢ Acommon mistake is to design a structure with an envisaged lifetime of 5 years

(e.g. a temporary situation during construction) with a load condition with a

frequency of 1 per 5 years. Equation (10.12) shows that the probability that this

load is reached or exceeded is 1-exp(-1) ~ 0.63. So, there is a 63 % chance that

conditions will be worse than assumed, which is usually not acceptable.


256 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

In the case of a sea defence structure, to protect a low-lying area, it is impossible
to define the lifetime of the structure since it is supposed to protect "forever".
Assuming an acceptable probability of 1% in a human life (e.g. 75 years), instead
of using the lifetime of the structure, Equation (10.12) gives the frequency for the
design conditions: f= 1/7500 year which is quite a normal number for dangerous
flooding hazards.

10.3 Maintenance

10.3.1 Introduction

Maintenance is essential for every structure. Throwaway products may also penetrate

into engineering, but they will always be limited to parts of structures. Even then, the

replacement of these parts is maintenance. Maintenance is primarily focused on the

strength of a structure but monitoring of boundary conditions (e.g. sea level rise) can

also be part of a maintenance program. Maintenance is therefore part of the

management of a structure and consists mainly of inspection and repair. The total

management policy links design, maintenance and the risk of failure of a structure, see

also Section 10.1 and Figure 10-1. A picture similar to Figure 10-1 can be drawn for

an optimum maintenance strategy.

10.3.2 Maintenance policies

Several maintenance policies are possible, depending on the predictability of the

decrease of strength in time, the costs and possibilities of inspection and repair, and

the consequences of failure. The different policies are, see also Vrijling et al.,1992 and

CUR,1995:

Failure-based maintenance

Figure 10-11 shows the concept of failure-based maintenance. No action is taken until

a structure, or part of it, fails. After that it is repaired or replaced by a new one. An

example from every day life is a light bulb in a living room which is only replaced

after it stops functioning. This is an efficient maintenance policy since the complete

lifespan is used, but it is only permissible for non-essential parts with low risk. In

hydraulic engineering this is no common practice.

Time-based maintenance

If the deterioration can be predicted reasonably well, a time-based maintenance policy

can be applied, see Figure 10-12. This is e.g. the case when the deterioration is

governed by wear and tear due to the weather. An example from every day life is the

painting of window frames of a house. An example from hydraulic engineering is

painting a steel gate of a storm surge barrier.


10. DIMENSIONS 257
cA i se eemeagneemeemamammsemeenemmen
strength repair
| | MS
failure time
Figure 10-11 Failure-based maintenance
__fepair repair _ repair __._. fea
dew strength Sey
load
Pil bats peakpeak
time based fine. use based toe load based Ae:
Figure 10-12 Time-, use- or load-based maintenance
Use-based maintenance
Use-based maintenance depends on the usage of the structure. This is the case when
the wear and tear is mainly a function of use intensity. An example from every day life
is the overhaul of a car engine after so many km's. An example from hydraulic
engineering is the overhaul and repair, if necessary, of the machinery of a gate of a
storm surge barrier.
Load-based maintenance
When the deterioration is mainly governed by extreme loads, repair is carried out after
the occurrence of an extreme load or after accumulation of loads. An example from
everyday life is the replacement of safety belts in a car after a collision.
State-based maintenance
This is probably the most common maintenance policy in hydraulic engineering. An
example from everyday life is the repair of a roof which is inspected every now and
then and treated when its state gives rise to repair. Examples from hydraulic
engineering are revetments.


258 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
a Ea, ee RM ganna nena n == WamiNg limit
paces TS baci crea aaa Ni bares OtON it
actual predicted ">.
strength strength . ° rough inspection
@ detailed inspection
load
time
Figure 10-13 State-based maintenance
Figure 10-13 gives the procedure for state-based maintenance. The structure is
inspected roughly at fixed intervals, based on the expected and predicted decrease of
strength. After some warning limit state is reached, the inspections become more
frequent and more detailed. When the action limit state is reached, repairs have to be
carried out.
Figure 10-14 shows how to arrive at the best maintenance policy. In this picture
monitoring means keeping track of time or of usage or of the load that the structure
has been subjected to. Inspection has to be done on the spot.
given é ,
structure €onsequence large ,_Geterioration\, no sehen
and failure of failure predictable sepas
mechanism 2 2 maintenance
small yes
time-, use- or
failure-based load-based
maintenance maintenance
+ monitoring
Figure 10-14 Choice of maintenance policy
In practice, a mixture of the various policies is often used. E.g. in addition to a time-
based policy, inspection can lead to postponing repair if the state of the structure is
better than expected. In general, one can say that inspection reduces the uncertainties
in the parameters.
Which maintenance policy is most appropriate, depends on the consequences of failure
and the predictability of the strength as a function of time, see Figure 10-14.
10.3.3 Probabilistic approach of inspection
An outlet sluice is constructed with a bottom protection to avoid damage due to scour.
The apron is just long enough to prevent collapse of the sluice structure ifa slide occurs
in the scour hole. Before that happens, the slope of the scour hole should be covered
with slag material or gravel. If the slope slides, the scour depth is an estimated 8 m


10. DIMENSIONS 259
(the critical scour depth) and the slope angle after sliding is estimated to be 1:6, leading
to a necessary apron length of say 50 m, see Figure 10-15a and Chapter 4 for further
details.
Note: Of course, the stability of a scour hole depends heavily on the geotechnical
properties of the soil and the upstream slope of the scour hole. All of these factors have
been simplified in this example into one parameter, the critical scour depth: Ne.
The scour depth as a function of time is determined with the Breusers-equation, see
Chapter 4:

_ _ lt) 02
au —u,
f(t) = Ca ns (10.13)
10A
This function can be rewritten as a limit state function:
ae)? 92/4
Zn (yee) lo f (10.14)
10 A""
The following values are assumed in these equations (all parameters with normal
distributions):
Table 10-5

[ame [a [ee ea
[Deviation (@[ 1 [OT mis [00S mis [028m [00s [2m |
The most uncertain parameters are @ and /sc, hence they get a large deviation. Figure
10-15b shows the development of the scour depth as a function of time according to
equation (10.13), using the average value of Table 10-5 (a = 2.5).
Note: ais used as a turbulence parameter in Equation (10.13) and in the probabilistic
approach it is used as an influence parameter.
The question now is how soon and how often should the scour depth be sounded in
order to know when the scour slope has to be covered, e.g. when the hole is 5-6 m
deep. A level II analysis is carried out with the other values in Table 10-5 with time, t,
(effective flow time in days) as a deterministic parameter with different values. Figure
10-15c shows the results (upper line). According to Equation (10.13) the critical scour
depth of 8 m will be reached after 95 days (Figure 10-15b). Figure 10-15c shows that
there is a 50% probability that the depth is indeed 8 m after 95 days. This is, of course,
logical: with all parameters normally distributed, there is 50 % chance that the value
is higher and 50% chance that it is lower. No matter how large the deviations, the
Gauss-curve is centred around the expectation value.


260 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
©
hy —— iy,
— -— = by
10; ® => 1.0; ©
go eczel Or | gi} TT
rs a Doe oer Oe
|Z | at TL...
, t Ms aeoes 2° ne = 2.0, on = 0.5)
t) 50 100 150 0 50 100 150
——> ‘time (days) ——> “time (days)
Figure 10-15 Failure probability scour hole
But a probability of 50% is very high and the risk is unacceptable. So, the responsible
manager will not postpone inspection till the expected critical depth is reached
according to Equation (10.13). When a low probability is considered acceptable, e.g.
5%, Figure 10-15c shows that inspection should be carried out after 5 days of effective
flowing time! Sounding is not very expensive and this can be seen as a test run of the
new sluice.
During the first 20 days of use of the sluice, more soundings can be done and the result
could be that the scour development is not along line 1 in Figure 10-15b, but along line
2. This means that the estimated a-value (determined either by rough estimates as
illustrated in Chapter 4, or by considering the results of model tests) was too
pessimistic. With the results of the soundings, a new value for a can be determined
(assuming that the values for the other parameters are correct). The a-value for line 2
is 2 for which, again, a probabilistic calculation can be carried out. The results are
directly valid for the considered structure, so a lower deviation can also be assumed,
e.g. 0.5 instead of 1, as was the case in Table 10-5. Line 2 in Figure 10-15c¢ shows the
results for the new probability failure. The next inspection could be after 50 days of
flow. If the scour process is still according to line 2 in Figure 10-15b, the slope could
be covered after 100 to 150 days flow time.
Note: When applying a lower a-value based on soundings, one should be sure of the
composition of the soil. If the upper layer consists of a more resistent layer with some
cohesion, scour can accelerate again after breaking through this layer.
This example demonstrates the use of inspection in maintenance. The costs are not
prohibitive and it reduces the uncertainty about the strength, hence it increases the
predictability of the behaviour of the structure.


10. DIMENSIONS 261
10.4 Failure mechanisms
10.4.1 Introduction
Chapter | already stated that it is paramount for a designer to have an idea of the
different failure mechanisms of a hydraulic structure. It is repeated once again that
most structures fail, not because the incoming wave height has been underestimated
with 10 or 20 %, but because a failure mechanism has been neglected. The contents
of chapter 1, concerning fault trees, will be further elaborated on relating them to
probabilistics and illustrating them with some examples.
10.4.2 Systems
A systems approach to the design of a hydraulic structure is a rather abstract notion,
but it can serve to illustrate some important elements of a design. Two important
concepts in structural systems are series and parallel systems, see Figure 10-16. In a
series system, every broken element means total failure. In a parallel system, the
function of a broken element can be transferred to other elements. An example of a
series system amongst protections is the various possible slip circles in a slope, see
Chapter 5. The weakest circle determines the safety. An example of a parallel system
is a single slip circle in non-homogenous soil. Strong soil layers can compensate for
weak parts in the soil, as all layers contribute to the total resistance.

series system ; .
S
RY
/ 4 Ry
A ; yy
@ C
= 53 ¥
a Py
parallel system 2b
t Fi fully correlated series or parallel system
‘a p allel system, no correlation
yo” 1 2 3 4 5 6
number of elements
Figure 10-16 Series and parallel systems
A series system consisting of two or more elements, has a total probability of failure
between:
max Pe < Prt SY Pei (10.15)

Note that the right summation is an approximation for small Pr.The lower boundary is
valid if there is full correlation between the elements, or in other words, if failure of


262 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

each element is coupled to failure of the other elements. The upper boundary is valid
if there is no correlation at all between failure of the elements. In that case the total
probability is the sum of all partial probabilities.

For a parallel system, the total probability is given by:

PryPea. Prin S Pomtop <- ™aAx Pr; (10.16)
Now the lower boundary (a multiplication of all of the probabilities) is valid without
any correlation and the upper boundary represents failure with full correlation.

The first thing that is striking is that there is no difference between the total probability
of failure of series and parallel systems if they have fully correlated elements. Figure
10-16 shows the extremes of Equations (10.15) and (10.16) for elements with equal
Pi, For partial correlations between the elements, the total probability lies between the
extremes in this figure.

For a practical application, much statistical data is needed for all parts of a structure.
This is beyond the scope of this book; the reader is referred to CUR, 1995. A
qualitative conclusion is that series systems should be avoided wherever possible and
that the system should contain enough redundancy. An example is a dike with a
protection layer of blocks and a body of sand or clay. With a sand body, severe damage
of the protection layer will quickly lead to breach of the dike, while a clay body can
resist the wave load in a storm for many hours.

10.4.3 Fault trees

In Chapter 1 a rough fault tree for a revetment was presented. Here we will go into
more detail. The series and parallel systems of Section 10.4.2 also play a role in fault
trees. A series system is represented in a fault tree by a so-called 'OR'-gate, indicating
that failure of one of the elements leads to failure of the system under consideration.
An 'AND'-gate represents a parallel system: failure of both elements is necessary for
failure of the system.

Figure 10-17 shows a (simplified) fault tree for a caisson on a sill as part of a closure
dam. Water flows through the open caissons. The flow can cause erosion of the top
layer of the sill and the head difference can cause erosion of the subsoil through the
filter. Both directly cause collapse of the caisson, hence an OR-gate in the fault tree.
Both phenomena are independent, hence not correlated and the probability of collapse
of the caisson is the sum of the probabilities of both. Scour can cause a slide when
there is insufficient inspection. If a slide occurs in loosely packed sand, this can lead
to liquefaction and subsequently to a flow slide, see Chapter 5. A flow slide and a short
bottom protection can lead to collapse of the caisson. All of these combinations are
AND-gates because both conditions are necessary to induce the next step.


10. DIMENSIONS 263
collapse
a
ecoafon top) erosion | /filter bott. prot:
layer scour [top iayer| erosion oo short
— side 7 ran
filter erosion (oa joosely
packed
isand
© ‘and’ gate: parallel system ra
A * 7 i insufficient
Figure 10-17 Series and parallel systems in fault tree
‘The fault tree for a revetment given in Chapter | is reproduced in some more detail in
Figure 10-18. Now (fictitious) probabilities (per year) have been added. Most elements
form series systems where the total probability is the sum of the partial probabilities.
When a partial probability is an order of magnitude smaller than the dominant
mechanism, it can be neglected, see the initial geotechnical instabilities compared with
the toe erosion.
failure
revetment
(14197
overall local
instabity instability
210 1.2 10
micro unstable toe instability | [instability | | wave aggressio
instability!  |geometry | | erosion filter top layer | overtop. collision
=] 0 Re] ae he oe RT
a
subsi-
dence
x | ca ce
Figure 10-18 Fault tree revetment with probabilities
Toe erosion and instability of the top layer have a probability equal to the hydraulic
conditions that cause them. This is the case when the design has been based on a
deterministic approach, see also Section 10.2.2. The combination of wave conditions
and subsidence of the soil form a parallel system, giving a probability of wave
overtopping equal to the multiplication of both partial probabilities. In the series
system of local instability this appears negligible compared with the other
mechanisms.


264 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
The use of fault trees lies mainly in the awareness of weak spots of a structure. It is
extremely difficult to establish a reliable absolute value for the total probability. It is
often advantageous to go through a fault tree bottom-up and top-down and, if
necessary, several times. When going bottom-up, the conclusion can be that a
probability somewhere in the system is too high, leading to an adaptation of a detail in
the design. When going top-down, one can start with an acceptable probability of the
top event and see what has to be done to each mechanism to reduce the probability to
this value. In the fault tree in Figure 10-17 it is obvious that erosion of the sill is more
dangerous than scour. So, the probability of erosion of the sill has to be kept low.
10.4.4 Examples
This section gives some examples from the hydraulic engineering practice concerning
cases where one or more failure mechanisms have been neglected, leading to failure
of a structure with large consequences. Starting point is, again, the fault tree of Figure
10-18.
Betore storm Core stone
pl i Sno _Face stone
(Ch shale fiter = OS
Sal, MUS en Ra=|—
(mean sea level)
lure Exton, ss
nal aN 6 el
(1) Subsicence of oe stones =
2) Oversteeperung of upper face = zone of
) Rolling, siding anc toppling of face stone = mus sw——| max.
(4) Overtopping by wave ¢. — attack
2H, 4—
Final colapse
e
ae
Figure 10-19 Collapse due to wave overtopping
Wave overtopping
If wave overtopping is underestimated, the result can be as shown in Figure 10-19, an
example from Australia. The top layer seems strong enough and filter layers have also
been included in the design. However, due to overtopping, wave action eroded the
unprotected soil on the crest of the revetment, leading to its total collapse.
Toe erosion
A bridge with an abutment was built across a river in Bangladesh, see Figure 10-20.
Due to the meandering of the river, the location of the abutment suffered severe


10. DIMENSIONS: 265
erosion. The revetment of the abutment consisted of a concrete slab and a sheet pile.
This sheet pile had been driven only a few meters into the subsoil and had not been
secured against erosion of the foreland. The sheet piles were undermined and the stiff
concrete slab cracked leading to the final collapse of the abutment. Repair work could
be carried out before the bridge itself was damaged.

Sag. OOO
g _—
oS Bonnet
abutment “Ss cross sections abutment
Ses
concrete titing
top layer erosion shes aaron
in concrete
sheetpile
se Pia NO
Figure 10-20 Collapse due to toe erosion
The abutment, situated in the outer bend of the meandering river, should have been
designed to be able to withstand the erosion process at the toe of the revetment, which
had a probability of occurrence of about 100%. Either a much longer sheet pile or an
extensive toe protection in the initial design would have been the result.
Wave overtopping and micro-stability
In 1953 many dikes in the south western part of The Netherlands collapsed. The crest
level of these dikes was too low and the inner slopes were too steep (1:1.5 - 1:2). The
water on the crest penetrated into the slope and the resulting groundwater flow,
combined with the steep slope, led to an unstable situation, see also Chapter 5.
How useful are fault trees?
The ultimate question is whether all this could have been prevented if a fault tree had
been used. Of course, the use of the fault tree in Figure 10-18, would have led to
awareness of the erosion at the toe of the abutment in Figure 10-20 and of the wave
overtopping of the revetment in Figure 10-19. These phenomena are already
mentioned in the tree, so one is forced to think about it. But how can all failure
mechanisms be included if one has to make a fault tree for a new case, as, by definition,
you omit what you overlook? In the case of the dikes of Figure 10-21, the probability
of high water levels was insufficiently recognized, see Intermezzo 10-1, and the
instability of the inner slopes was insufficiently understood at that time. Elements
(Dolos) of large breakwaters have been known to break due to high stresses in the
concrete, a mechanism that had not been included in any fault tree.


266 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
wave
ed erie ins = . overtopping
penetration
seepage
Figure 10-21 Collapse of dike due to micro-instability
So, a fault tree can be useful but it offers no guarantee that nothing has been overlooked
or underestimated. The general message in this book is that insight and knowledge of
the phenomena is essential. Without that, a fault tree is useless. A brainstorm session
with people of various backgrounds can be very helpful to avoid omitting mechanisms
in a fault tree. The first part of the brainstorm session can just be summing up possible
failure mechanisms. The second part can be trying to establish the probability of every
mechanism, in some cases only in a qualitative way. The use of a fault tree is then a
powerful tool to avoid blunders and to recognize weak spots in a design.
10.5 Summary
Starting with the general notion:
Risk = probability x consequence
the probabilistic approach of a design is treated. A reliability function is defined:
Z= strength — load
from which the failure probability follows:
Pr=P(Z<0)
This approach can be elaborated on various levels:
Level III: a full (numerical) integration of Z, or a Monte Carlo approach, where the
various parameters that make up Z get a value according to their probability
distribution. In the Monte Carlo approach, a structure is built and tested, as it were,
say 10000 times, the number of times the structure fails gives the failure probability.
Level II: Z, and all underlying probability distributions are assumed to have a normal
distribution again resulting in the establishment of Pr and influence factors of all
parameters involved (a).
Level I: starting with a desired Pr and the influence factors from a level II approach,
a partial safety coefficient for each parameter is defined.
Level 0: a semi-probabilistic or deterministic approach based on experience in which
design values for loads and strengths are selected. The Poisson distribution:


10. DIMENSIONS 267

P=1-exp(-f1)
can be a usefull tool when a design value for the load is to be established.
Several ways of maintenance are mentioned. For protections, a state-based mainte-
nance approach is usually the most appropriate. Inspection is an essential part of a
state-based maintenance approach.
An overview of all relevant failure mechanisms is essential to be able to create a “fool
proof” design. This overview can best be presented by combining the mechanisms in
a fault tree. A brainstorm session with several experts can help to avoid overlooking
a relevant mechanism. This is important, since most structures do not fail because of
an underestimation of the load, but due to an important failure mechanism which has
been overlooked.
10.6 APPENDIX: Probabilistic approach Level Il
In this appendix, the algorithm to come to a failure probability will be given by means
ofa simple example. The following iterative procedure is to find B, @ ete.:
1. Estimate siz from Z and the estimated values of the various parameters in the design
point:

na
ee ee OZ *
tg =A a oats) (,-)
ial

(10.17)
Asa first estimate for x;*, 4; can be used.
2. Determine oz from the contribution of the various parameters to the variation of Z:

hn 2 1/2
ozy >
o =i 4) o (10.18)
: Pe |

3. Calculate # from Equation (10.10)
4. Determine the @-values (which indicate the influence on Pr) for each parameter
from:


268 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
P
a, =o (10.19)
&; Oz

This shows that both an important role of x: in Z (indicated by €2/Axi) and a large
uncertainty about the value of x: (indicated by ox) are responsible for a large a-value.
5. Make a new estimate for the design-point values with:

= 14, -a/Boy (10.20)
6. Find a substituting normal distribution for not-normally distributed parameters for
the design-point value of the parameter.
These steps are to be repeated until the design-point values have converged with
sufficient accuracy. With the final value of , the failure probability, Pr, is derived
from the standard normal distribution.
For a limit-state function with many parameters, a computer is the most suitable
instrument to do the job. However, in order to enlarge the insight into this method, an
example for the revetment in Section 10.2.2 will be shown with further simplifications.
The limit-state function for the revetment will be reduced to just two variables, which
are representative for load and strength. This has three advantages: the joint probability
of load and strength can be easily visualized, contributing to a better understanding,
the iteration can be shown with a manual computation and an "exact" solution by
means of numerical integration (level III) can be obtained.
Simplified Z-function
The Z-function according to Equation (10.5) is simplified further. Only the most
important parameters concerning load (Hs) and strength (dhso) are defined as random
variables. Again, the wave heights are assumed to have an exponential distribution
(10.6). The iteration to find the design point, needs to be started with the average value,
Hand standard deviation, o; of the parameters. For an exponential distribution, and
care given by:

1 1
My =8+—=1.26 oy =~ =0.26 (10.21)
a a

see also Equation (10.6) and textbooks on mathematics.
For the stones the same, normally distributed diameter is chosen (j11= 0.6 m, ou = 0.05
m). The other parameters will be defined as deterministic parameters, using the values
in Section 10.2.2 with $= 10. The Z-function (10.5) then reduces to:


DIMENSIONS 8D

z=2.533-—s_ (10.22)

1.6 dso

The first step in the iteration is to find wz with jas first estimate for the design point
values. Note that now the second member on the right-hand side of Equation (10.17)
is 0. We find z= 1.22 m.
azis determined from Equation (10.18) again with yisen funso as first estimates:

oe _ -l 2 eS (10.23)

OH, 1.6d,59 Odysy  1.6dys0
leading to —1.042 m’ and 2.188 m’ respectively. From Equation (10.18) we then find
oz = 0.292 and from Equation (10.19): avs = -0.927 and cunso = 0.374. Equation
(10.10) gives B= 4.179 and Equation (10.20): H,” = 2.267 m and dyso” = 0.522 m.
The next step in the iteration procedure is to replace the exponential distribution for
H, with a normal distribution which has the same probability density and probability
in the design point, H,”. This is done by equating:

. 2
exp| -0.5 Hs ~ Hi, normal
( . )) OH, normal
3.83 exp(-3.83 H,’ -1))= —\—~— (10.24)
OH, normal N27
and:
Hy °
s 7 1a
exp] -0.5 HH, normal
Hy OH, normal
1—exp(-3.83(H,° -1))= [| —~———___—"_£ an,” (10.25)
( ( ) J O11, normal V2

The left-hand side of equation (10.25) is equal to 0.9922. This probability is equivalent
to a B-value for the normal distribution of 2.42, which can be found in standard tables
and which is equal to (Hs" — Lir-normal) / Ovs-nomat- From the equations (10.24) and
(10.25), with the H,"-value from the first iteration, we then find the two unknowns:
Hrts-normat = 0.495 and oris-nomat = 0.735.
The iteration is now repeated with the value for H," from the first iteration and using
Huts-xormat ANd Op4s-normat in equations (10.17) and (10.18) leading to a new value for H.",
and subsequently with equations (10.24) and (10.25) leading to new values for
Hits-normal ANd Otis-normal-


270 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Note that at the start the second member on the right-hand side of Equation (10.17)
was 0, while in the end the first member will be zero, since the design point is situated
on the Z = 0 line (Z[xi"] = 0). The second part then represents the average value of Z
as "predicted" from the design point: G2/Ai - (t0:i—).
Finally this leads to:
Table 10-6
B= 2.55, Pr= 0.0054
2.293 m
a |
It is clear that the variations of the wave height are dominant in the results (compare
a-values). Note that a-values for loads are negative and for strength positive.
Since Equation (10.22), the simplified Z-function, has only two (independent) random
variables, the probability density can be computed from:
3.83 exp(-3.83(H, -1) dyso -0.6 >
p(Z)=P(H,)-p( dao) =o B83) on -3( Sen
0.05/27 0.05

(10.26)
From this function, the failure probability can be found directly by numerically
integrating the probability density, in accordance with Equation (10.3). This has to be
done for all values H. > 1 m (for which the wave height distribution is valid) and
knowing that (from Equation (10.22)) Z <0 for H.>4.05dhs0:

2
ne ff 3.83 exp(-3.83(H, —1)) oa-05 (ss <8) |e att,
HeddSdys 0.0527 0.05

(10.27)
This integration gives: Pr= 0.0057 which is the "exact" solution for this simplified
case (Level III, numerical integration). This number, compared with Table 10-6, is
only slightly different, thus an approximation with a level II approach gives reasonable
results.
The final results can also be presented graphically, further clarifying the approach and
the meaning of the various notions in the equations. Figure 10-22 shows lines of equal
probability density from Equation (10.26) together with lines of equal Z from Equation


10. DIMENSIONS 2m
(10.22). The lines of equal probability density are the contour lines of the probability
mountain (see also Figure 10-3). The design point indeed appears to be situated on the
line Z= 0.
3.83 A= 1 (horizontal scale different for H, and djs.!)
eS 1 omy
08 He
a 2-05.77 =
CO — SS. Pal oe
SS ee
ze gol Bal tual tas) “o2), -o.11-0.05)
. fod ~ ~~ Ko SS \ Ze-05 ‘e
06 ar) ar >D ) .— Sot] ph ee
Le |e Oe Aer 8
be Ba ee “i robability
re aes cee Soneky as
ae ele
o 4 o ; 15 20 25 i 30
ES — tke
Figure 10-22 Top view of probability mountain, simplified case
As said before (in Section 10.2.1), the volume of the part of this mountain where Z <
0, divided by the total volume gives the failure probability. This part was calculated
directly with Equation (10.27).
Figure 10-23 is a 3-dimensional representation of Figure 10-22. Figure 10-23a gives a
view of the Z-plane. QZ/AH, and AZ/Gdyso, as used in Equations (10.17), (10.18) and
(10.19), are the slopes in the diso- and Hy-directions at the design point. Figure 10-23b
represents the design point on the flanks of the probability mountain showing that the
probability density indeed has its maximum in the design point.
—— SR ED &
a BEX User =e
See “yeh LEED =
dango ae, Aner ite ee
a ee “

Figure 10-23 3-dimensional view of Z-function and probability mountain with design point
Figure 10-24, finally, shows the equivalent normal distribution of the wave heights as
derived from Equations (10.24) and (10.25). Again, the intersection and the tangent of
the two distributions are at the design point.


272 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

4 rol zs! FS
a| | | | a i NG
=3 j Yu nom % 10"
tL tel | gL a4 | Ne |
$2 805 8 10° N
Foml\ | | & [7 tt INI
i h ia

5 1 2 3 6 1 2 3 1

- 1% 0 1 Ze, 3
— tial =e, normal
distibution Gistibution PF design point
Figure 10-24 Exponential distribution and substitute normal distribution

Only two variables were included in the limit state function to make the example as
clear as possible. The manual computations as executed above can serve as an
algorithm also for more than two variables. This algorithm results in a simple computer
program for a level II approach.


11 PROTECTIONS
Erosion protection in Sri Lanka (photo Pilarzcyk)


274 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

11.1 Introduction

If erosion occurs somewhere, five main options are available:

1. Do nothing
If erosion causes no problems, this is the favourite option, see also Chapter 1.

2. Take away the cause of the problems
This is theoretically always the best thing to do, but since you need to know
what the cause is and you have to be able to do something about it, it is not
always feasible. A solution that comes close is to build groynes along a coast
where the erosion is caused by longshore transport. If the erosion is caused by
cross-shore transport, groynes are useless!

wave
action
eroding coastline
Figure 11-1 Groynes along coast with longshore transport

3. Supply sediment
This may seem a poor solution, since it cures nothing and it may have to go
on forever, but it is often a good measure. It is very flexible and fits very well
in environment strategies, see also Chapter 12. Whether this is the right option
depends mainly on costs and risks, since sediment is usually supplied with
intervals of several years. For coasts and rivers this "soft" solution can be an
attractive alternative. Further treatment of this option is part of morphological
studies and is beyond the scope of this book.

4. Reduce the loads
This can be done by constructing a breakwater in front of an eroding coast.
Again the effects on erosion are part of morphological studies and will not be
treated here. Only the design of such a breakwater is a subject in this book.

5. Increase the strength
This is the "hard" solution. Although this book mainly focusses on this type
of solution, it should be considered in a certain perspective. It is not a very
flexible option and it can sometimes lead to more erosion in adjacent areas. In
many cases however, especially when there is a lot of pressure to preserve the
available space, it is the only solution.


11. PROTECTIONS 275
11.2 Bed protections
11.2.1 General
The main solutions as presented in the previous section are not all possible for bed
protections. When the cause of erosion is the disturbance of the flow by some structure,
and of course this structure was designed on purpose, taking away the cause is not an
option. Sediment supply to the bottom is often not feasible, load reduction can be
realised by streamlining the outflow of a sluice, leading to a lower velocity and/or less
turbulence. Mostly, however, the increase of strength by means of a bottom protection
is the most suitable measure. From Chapter 4 we already know that the main function
of a bottom protection is not to prevent scour, but to keep the scour hole at such a
distance from the structure, that the risk of falling into its own hole is minimized.
11.2.2 Loose rock
General
A bottom protection made of loose rock is relatively simple to realise. Rock or gravel
is easy to obtain and, as long as the accuracy demands are not too high, the necessary
equipment is available almost everywhere. If no parallel filter gradient is active in the
bottom protection, (when there is only turbulent open channel flow on top of the
protection) one or two layers is usually enough to prevent loss of bottom material
through the protection layer.
When the necessary diameters of the top layer and the original bed material are not too
large (e.g. gravel or light rock on sand) one layer can be sufficient, provided the layer
is thick enough. The equation by Wérmann, 1989, see Equation (6.3), indicates a
reasonable thickness in relation to the diameter ratio. The minimum thickness of a
layer is usually 2d,so. For small stones like fine gravel, this leads to a minimum
thickness which is impossible to realise. In that case, a minimum thickness of a few
dm is used, see also Chapter 13.
When a filter layer is applied between the top layer and the original soil, a material
with a wide gradation is preferred, like slag. The use of a single geotextile as a filter
layer in a bed protection is difficult when the protection has to be made under water,
since it is very hard to unfold the textile in that case. A combination with a fascine
mattress is a common alternative.
Rotterdam Waterway
An example of a very complex bed protection consisting of loose grains, is the storm
surge barrier in the Rotterdam Waterway (Maeslant Kering). Figure 11-2 shows the
barrier which consists of two convex steel gates with 300 m long arms. Each gate
rotates around a spherical hinge and floats into position. The gates are then lowered


276 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
on top of concrete blocks. During this closure, high velocities occur between the gates
and the concrete blocks, due to the growing head difference across the barrier, which
causes a severe load on the bed. When the gates are closed, the head difference across
the barrier causes a large parallel gradient inside the sill.

pe WES

ee I igre
J \
sah 2
ome a=
Moar a
MS. _ hs,
KE mt
ALE Rane
aw
Figure 11-2 Overview Storm surge barrier Rotterdam Waterway (photo Aero Lin)

Figure 11-3 gives the cross-section of the barrier which shows the complete bed
protection with the stone classes of the top layer. At the sea side, the maximum stone
weight is 300-1000 kg and at the riverside 3000-6000 kg. This is because the critical
situation is closing the gates during a strong flood flow. In that case, the flow
accelerates at the sea side while it decelerates downstream of the gate. Chapter 2 and
3 explain that deceleration is associated with a high degree of turbulence, hence the
top layers at the sea side and at the river side differ. When the barrier is open, normal
ebb and flood flow occur with much lower velocities. Farther away fiom the sill, the
stone sizes in the top layer decreases.
Figure 11-4 shows the composition of the sill. The design conditions for the filter
below the sill are now governed by the situation with closed gates when a large head
difference is present across the barrier. The original bed material consists of fine sand
and silt. The first filter layer is sand ranging from 0.5 to 5 mm. The other layers below
the top layer are gravel 3.5-35 mm, rock 30-140 mm and rock 10-60 kg. This is a good
example of a geometrically closed filter.


11. PROTECTIONS 217
gate
seaside ~ —
" riverside
300-1000 kg 3-6 ton
4-3 ton “7
60-300 kg |_-}- 60-200 ko»
10-60 kg = | 10-60 kg
scour hole -<-b-—-nemtenas ela teria = —l——
—<—s scour hole
filteriayers —-
concrete sill Blocks
Figure 11-3 Cross-section bed protection barrier Rotterdam Waterway
seaside | fiverside
3-6 ton
cee ORE _ concrete beam SAF OCS treecscy
a
El  —————— —
0.5-5mm —-3,5-35mm —-30-140mm 10-60 kg
Figure 11-4 Cross-section sill and filter Rotterdam Waterway
The parts of the bed protection without an active filter gradient, have a 0.4 m thick
layer of phosphorous slags (40-160 mm) directly on the original bed, mostly with only
one layer on top of that, see Figure 11-5.
1-3ton 300-1000 kg 60-300 kg 10-60 kg
eb, op yp
i —
a fosforous slags
10-60 kg 40-160 mm
Figure 11-5 Cross-section bed protection river-side
Figure 11-6, finally, shows the complexity of the geometry of the bottom protection
and the variety in top layer stone sizes.
11.2.3 Fascine mattresses
General
The traditional bottom protection in the Netherlands is a fascine mattress which
consists of willow faggots (bundles of twigs) and is covered with stones. When made
elsewhere, willow can be replaced by bamboo shoots or any other local vegetation that
is flexible and strong enough. When the mattresses stay well under water, they can last
for more than a hundred years.


278 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
seaside 5-40 kg
concrete sill blocks 10-60 kg Je 60-300 kg
300-1000 kg
10-15 ton
WwW 36 ton
1-3 ton
300-1000 kg
60-300 kg
/ \ 10-60 kg
riverside
_5-40kg
Figure 11-6 Top view bottom protection barrier Rotterdam Waterway
twigs
Eps JZ
LE aT a LF LEP EEE:
MP LL Zt
a a PoP
ae 7 ff ZG y
faggots trellis
Figure 11-7 Fascine mattress
Figure 11-7 shows a classical fascine mattress. The faggots serve as the backbone of
the structure while the bottom twigs carry the stones while still floating (see also
Chapter 13). A minimum coverage of stones is applied to sink the mattress. Depending
on the external load, the mattress is further covered with stones by dumping after the
mattress has been sunk.
Filter function
Willow twigs are too open to serve as a filter. In classical mattresses the filter function
is performed by a reed mat under the mattress. The critical gradient of such a structure
(parallel to the bottom) is about 3-4 %, so, with higher demands another solution has
to be found. In that case, a geotextile is often applied, see Figure 11-8.


11. PROTECTIONS 279
: — > s
ee pin ES
BPO saat AOE,
aoseee a ep :
ee xy
ae ae \
3 ‘
pea OF Ney Fe
ihe .
Figure 11-8 Geotextile under mattress (photo Griendhouthandel)
11.2.4 Composite mattresses
General
When large areas have to be protected and/or the filter demands are high, the
construction of loose rock protections can become time consuming and expensive. The
same is, more or less, true for the use of fascine mattresses. For the Deltaproject, very
large areas of bottom had to be protected (in total several km?) and much effort has
been put into the development of alternative protections. As an example the bottom
protection of the Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier is treated.
Eastern Scheldt
Figure 11-9 shows the Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier and its bottom protection.
Again, different functions can be discerned:
1. keeping enough distance between the scour holes on both sides of the barrier,
2. preventing erosion under the barrier when the gates are closed and a large head
difference exists across the barrier with a large gradient in the filter,
3. protecting the bottom near the gates when large velocities occur through the gates
while closing or when all gates are closed except one (the probability of one gate
not being closed on time is rather high with 66 gates!)


280 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
sits |
he o = |
5 |
I ee 4
2 ad ee aS
NS sez, LP ECR Se Fe
oe NAY 6 i> Se
eee eee | | eX /
ee es Se) A =
foe i iat +o= - a
- b ete —
ay a fe =
posers, ase Su) Ce eet
F i apse: ee
Py ATA aa te
eae ce Sarit = ll
Se ae > es
af 4 ” < So
i ee i AN Vice: > =
‘ SA ee
om | Eee \ 4 %
wp Gade
7 i et P .. 9
4 > “= ba
eu eal
Cs
» »
‘¢. be
:
Figure 11-9 Overview Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier (drawing Rudolf Das, courtesy
Rijkswaterstaat)
Figure 11-10 shows the composition of concrete block mats as applied on both sides
of the barrier. The mat only has to withstand the turbulent flow. The filter gradient
parallel to the bottom is equal to the gradient of the free surface, hence in the order of
magnitude of less than 1 %. A simple geotextile on the bottom is enough in that case.
The concrete blocks are attached to the geotextile with plastic pins. The mats were
manufactured mechanically in a specially built factory. The concrete blocks sink the
mat and keep it stable on the bottom. After sinking, the mat is covered with steel slags
for more stability in the turbulent currents of the mat as a whole. The dimensions of
the mats for the storm surge barrier were 30 x 200 m*. The sinking of the mats required
special equipment, see Chapter 13. This equipment is specially built for the project, so
such options are only possible for large works (like the Eastern Scheldt Barrier or the
Venice Lagoon Barriers).


11. PROTECTIONS 281
steel slags or light rock
Concrete BIOCKS —_ CTE CSIP AAI REI
geotextile plastic pins
Figure 11-10 Blockmat Eastern Scheldt
Under the barrier a large gradient parallel to the bed is active. Head differences of more
than 5 m are possible while the width of the concrete sill on which the gates close is
about 20 m (see Figure 11-12), leading to gradients of about 25 %. Given the
consequences if the barrier subsides (distortion of the barrier frames and gates) for the
essential function of the barrier structure as a safeguard against flooding, the failure
probability of the filter must be very low. Hence, a geometrically closed filter seems
appropriate. The construction of such a filter with several layers of relatively fine
material in flowing water of more than 25 m deep is a Herculean task and, given the
length of the barrier (4000 m), would be very expensive. A sophisticated geotextile
mat could serve the purpose, but no guarantee could be given that the geotextile would
last the expected lifetime of the barrier (100 — 200 years). The solution that was
decided upon is a combination of a geometrically closed filter and geotextiles, see
Figure 11-11. The geotextile wraps the filter grains and thus enables to bring the thin
layers of fine material to the bottom in such a way that the integrity of the filter
structure remains intact. So, when the geotextile eventually deteriorates, the
geometrically closed granular filter is right in place.
steel bolt. geotextile
vem Tf JLo] —
=
110mm sand
Figure 11-11 Filtermat under barrier Eastern Scheldt
When the gates are closed, large velocities occur near the sill. In order to protect the
foundation of the barrier, large rocks and concrete blocks are placed, see Figure 11-12.


282 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
seaside ay, Eastern Scheldt
blocks a
1-3 ton 4-3 ton
300-1000 kg | 4 rl c 6-10 ton
‘VE
= Ee
filter‘mats 10-60 kg
Figure 11-12 Cross section barrier foundation Eastern Scheldt
Figure 11-13 shows the bottom protection of a part of the barrier in the Eastern Scheldt.
block mats a
Rpm layer
BREE EERE RTEEY B25 piers win gates
(artificial) \ (artificial)
island island
Figure 11-13 Top view bottom protection barrier Eastern Scheldt
For the bed protections around the movable barriers in the Venice lagoon, a similar
type of mat is used. However for this mat the geotextile is an integral part of the
strength and is assumed to stay in place during lifetime. This makes it possible to apply
a much thinner mat. The Venice mat consists of two layers of polypropylene fabric
with pve coated steel mesh for reinforcement. Between the geotextile a granular ballast
material is applied. The two geotextile layers are connected by rivets. The mat has a
total thickness of 5 cm.
11.2.5 Evaluation
In the previous sections, several alternative bottom protections have been reviewed.
What to choose when? The first striking difference is the choice for a granular filter in
the Rotterdam Waterway and for composite mattresses in the Eastern Scheldt, while
at first sight both structures are very much alike: both are large scale storm surge
barriers with large head differences etc. The choice was based on very practical
grounds. Both are large structures, but there is large and extra large. The barrier in


11. PROTECTIONS 283
Rotterdam is about 400 m long while the total length of the Eastern Scheldt barrier is
about 4000 m (divided into three parts). This scale difference, and the circular plan of
the Rotterdam barrier, see Figure 11-6, made it economically not feasible to build a
special factory and pontoon to sink the protection in the Rotterdam case, while for the
Eastern Scheldt this was a cost-effective solution. Moreover, the intensive shipping in
Rotterdam made it impossible to work with an anchored pontoon.
For small scale projects, one should not think of mechanically fabricated bottom
protections. Loose rock and/or fascine mattresses will do for many projects. A reason
to consider the use of a geotextile in a bottom protection can be that it offers better
protection against a sliding scour hole, see Figure 11-14. If a protection consists of
loose rock, the scour process can go on after sliding, since the filter structure has been
disrupted. A coherent protection can “hang” on the slope while the filter function
remains largely intact. In Figure 11-14, a concrete block mat has been drawn, but more
or less the same holds for a geotextile under a fascine mattress.

loose grains concrete block mat
emmane: owes
=
PICO) e “=
RE)
1a Qe,
194) Ken
_ _
Figure 11-14 Sliding of scour hole with loose and coherent protection

11.2.6 Piers
Although the previous sections were classified along the different types of protection,
not discriminating between the structures to be protected, this section deals exclusively
with the protection of (bridge) piers and monopile wind turbine generators. Bottom
protection behind sluices and barriers should be long enough to keep the scour hole at
distance of the structure to be protected. A longer bottom protection usually does not
significantly reduce the scour depth (see Chapter 4), but it reduces the danger of
damage due to a slide or flow slide. The bottom protection around (bridge) piers is
different in this respect. The disturbance of the flow around the pier is of a very local
nature: a few diameters from the pier, the flow has its normal value again. This means
that a larger protection indeed reduces the scour depth. A circular protection of 3 — 4
times the pier diameter is usually enough, see Figure 11-15a.


284 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
General lowering
'D'34D of bottom
Figure 11-15 Bridge pier protection
When the area is morphologically unstable one should take this into account or
otherwise the protected bridge pier will act as an extra obstruction to the flow, see
Figure 11-15b, aggravating the erosion and possibly finally leading to collapse of the
pier.
11.3 Bank protections
11.3.1 Revetments
Revetments can protect a river or canal bank. Only the most frequently utilised
materials will be treated here; often the locally availability of materials determines the
choice. Aesthetic aspects can also play a role. Vast lengths of revetments with rock
possibly do not look good, but then again, the same holds for concrete blocks or asphalt
or even grass. Monotony can be prevented by diversifying materials or shapes, see also
Chapter 12 concerning the environment.
Some general aspects of revetments, like transitions and toe protections, which are also
valid for shore protections, are discussed in Section 11.5
11.3.2 Loose rock
Loose rock can be used in almost any case. When accessibility is an issue, rock has
some disadvantages. But, being easily available and applicable without specialized
equipment or personnel, it will always be an important material. Figure 11-23 shows
loose rock as part of a simple revetment, only consisting of a geotextile with light rock
(10 — 60 kg) on top.
A fascine mattress can also be applied as a bank protection. The hedges (“trellis”) in
Figure 11-7 serve to give the stones some more stability on the slope.
11.3.3. Composite mattresses
Composite mattresses can be applied when the accessibility of the bank is part of the
terms of reference. Also, aesthetic aspects can play a role. Application is usually only
viable for long stretches of bank. For a very small scale project, the special equipment


11. PROTECTIONS 285
necessary to place the mats might lead to high costs. Figure 11-17 shows a block mat
ona canal bank.

l
|
a
“ eS =
Md Ze
me UA | a ae
5 eS a a 4 © |
> fs SS Ns a as, ‘me
‘ =. wie > aS
US Ane ees
4 ote see
: ee oa ae
LS OS,
. Rs at Pe
Re Pet gy 31) ool ae
. oa. fae al
Figure 11-16 Simple bank protection with geotextile
ae = Meae
Sag Ne ne ee ee se
Se eS ee Ge eS og ee
Serre ae Hos eee LIE EE
pe A See LIL
se SENG PE BBR OE LL Soon
mee EE in Be BOLO 2s LE
8 ie OO Ee LLL Le
EO EOS SOLS MLE LES |
Og Ee SOD LoS ZB
ie 2 LOL ECLA SBS.
cA BEB , SAS CON ae <n
ZG I *ZEAS— DF SSO SB
Figure 11-17 Block mat as bank protection (photo Armortek UK)


286 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
11.3.4 Rigid structures
Rigid structures are usually considered when a steep slope is wanted due to limited
available space. In that case, the structure has the characteristics of an earth retaining
structure. Sheet pile walls of steel, concrete or wood are examples of revetments e.g.
along canals, see Figure 11-18.

aate Tak

ae (eee SS " a 2

Vedanart! #9 { ee rf Bove
= eee. lan Be 4
a s
ee EE
= 7
Figure 11-18 Sheet pile wall along canal (photo CUR)

11.3.5 Groynes
River groynes can serve to maintain a certain depth in the river (for navigation
purposes) by forcing the water to flow between the groynes during normal or low
discharges or to keep the high flow velocities away from the river banks or a
combination of both. Figure 11-20 and Figure 11-19 show an example of a groyne
along the rivers in the Netherlands which consists of placed blocks on the higher parts
and fascine mattresses with loose rock under water. The crest of the groyne is situated
around mean water level. When the water level is higher, the river gets more space in
order not to hamper the run-off of the river flood. The distance between the groynes
should not be more than 5 times the length, but 3-4 times is better.
Structures such as the one in Figure 11-20 are expensive, particularly as usually many
groynes are necessary along a river stretch. Figure 11-21 shows a cheaper alternative
to protect the bank. By varying the openings between the piles, the flow gradient along
the bank can be adjusted within certain limits. To maintain a navigation channel this
type of groyne is less suitable.


11. PROTECTIONS 287
OW NE EZ
NWA W WEY Z
A\e \ : ‘
‘s n i fir ot i
f
>
Figure 11-19 River groyne in The Netherlands (river Waal, photo J.M. Stam, RWS)
i, Piao WZ 7
tem] ‘Zz Scat, i
LL lg —— °
poorer ——
FSIS
3 TSS AE
—somanssaginvaren _
LONGITUDINAL seco.
ite
ts “eae
epeceecens | BoReeicrR SESE rv
i T
Se
=. i Th 89
SN met
,— ae
Ly # mcm ~S_
mosh secrion ic ciliates ‘MATTRESS.
CROSS SECTION B- 8
Figure 11-20 River groyne (from Jansen et al,1979)


288 INTRODUCTION TOBED, BANKANDSHOREPROTECTION
1
— ——_ ~~~
NEPSPHPSESESERERE) — _
“ener A ——
wet PETE ee oh
UU . iv
Hee ee GT "
CURER Gna eiuad H
acs Le e-8
Figure 11-21 Pile screen (from Jansen et al,1979)
ry
TaVAUURHAUATTTTRUT ATT
rm f <1
BRT !
SS =
SS ae
SSS
: ——S
Figure 11-22 Pile screens in Jamuna river Bangladesh (Photo Van der Wal, 2000)
Especially in developing countries it can be useful to design structures which are more
labour intensive and less capital intensive. The above mentioned pile screens have to
be replaced relatively often, but on the long run this might be cheaper. In Table 11.1 a
comparison is made between a traditional Dutch groyne (beach groyne) and an
alternative, more labour intensive design. It is clear that in the Dutch situation the
capital intensive design is the cheapest, while in a developing country a labour
intensive design is cheaper. Especially when also the maintenance costs are taken into
consideration the alternative design is much more attractive in a developing country.
For the design of timber groynes detailed information can be found in Crossman and
Simm (2004).


11. PROTECTIONS 289
Table 11-1 Comparison groyne design in industrialised and developing country
(Verhagen and Yap, 1992)
Design from the Netherlands Alternative design
Element no Unit Ind. Cniry __ Dev.Cntry | Element no Unit __Ind.Cniry__ Dev.
Rate Cost Rate Cost | Cntry
Construction costs Rate Cost Rate Cost
Wooden piles, 3.6m 193pc 40 7720 20 3860 | Construction costs
Wooden piles,5m 252pc. 70 17640 35 8820 | Woodenpiles,3.5m 193pc 40 7720 20 3860
Wooden piles,6m  12pc 85 1020 42 504 | Wooden piles, 5m 292 pc. 70 20440 35 10220
Wooden piles, 7m  24pc 100 2400 50 1200 | Wood. sheetpile 2.5m 608 m 170 103360 85 51680
Wooden piles, 8 m 4pc 120 480 60 240 | Wood. Sheetpile3m — 206 m 200 41200 100 20600
Wood. sheetpile 2m 608m 170103360 85 51680 | Jute filtercloth 6390 m? 3 19170 1 6390
Wood. Sheetpile 3m 206m 200 41200 100 20600 | Placing jute filter cloth S00hr 40 20000 4 2000
Geotextile 6390 m? 2 12780 10 63900 | Pitched stones 3483 m? 60 208980 25 87075
Placing geotextile 500hr 40 20000 4 2000 | Placing pitched stone 5000 hr 55275000 6 30000
Concrete blocks 3483m? 40 139320 30 Low graded asphalt 250t 150 37500 75 18750
104490 Stones 25/80 2500 t 60 150000 40
Placing blocks 2200hr 40 88000 4 8800 100000
Hydraulic asphalt 194t 190 36860 150 29100 | Extra labour 200hr 40 8000 4 800
Stones 25/80 820t 60 49200 40 32800 | Use of shovel 25hr 60 1500 10 250
Stones 80/200 310t 35 10850 60 18600 | contingencies 5000 5000
Phosph.s slag 40/250 310t 35 10850 60 18600 | total 897870
Bituminous grouting 460t 250115000 250 336625
115000 unforeseen, risk, etc. 2.5% (22447 8416
Extra labour 50hr 40 2000 4 200 | grand total 920317
Use of shovel 25hr 60 1500 10 250 345041
Use of vibration crane 20hr 70 1400 12 240
contingencies 5000 5000
total 706880
518434
unforeseen, risk, etc. 3% 17672 12961
grand total 724552
531395
Maintenance Maintenance
Labourers 50hr 40 2000 4 200 | Labourers 200hr 40 8000 4 800
Use of Shovel 10hr 60 600 10 100 | Use of Shovel 20hr 60 1200 10 200
Extra stones & Geotex. 1000 1000 | replacement of piles 50pc 85 4250 42 2100
total 3600 1300 | Extra stones & Jute 1000 1000
total 16450 6100
Interest rate 4%, 30 years, multiplier 17.29 Interest rate 4%, 30 years, multiplier 17.29
Capitalised Maintenance cost _ 62251 22480 | Capitalised Maintenance cost 284453 105481
Total Project Cost 786803 Total Project Cost 1204770 = 450522
553874
11.4 Shore protection
11.4.1 Revetments and dikes
Loose rock
In shore protections, loose rock can also be used in (dike) revetments. In the
Netherlands, loose rock on dikes is, traditionally, only applied below mean water level.
Accessibility and aesthetics are the main reasons. Figure 1 1-23 shows an example from
Surinam, where rock is applied up to the crest of the dike.


290 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Placed blocks
Placed blocks (or columns or other shapes) can yield good (dike) revetments, provided
the elements are placed with skill and care. Figure 11-24 gives an example of a dike
revetment with natural placed blocks.
oceanside feith agpha, NSP -* 450m landside
15065049 eee esDO
NSP+071m_ gee
NSP___po eg SSX 89-200 mm
geotextile
10-60 kg
ass ) a
mee sma, ?
ee a ee
<The Se Sn \
Ee ATES aS
2 a rs “a r
re oes x
Figure 11-23 Loose rock dike revetment (Nickerie, Surinam, photo L. Philipse)


11. PROTECTIONS 291
6 |
a3. Se Soa coe
Rn EP re ee OS
naa, ay SS ae ting 1
: = Soret So eee
. ee Rage SS Pr :
a ee Gee setae 8S Re
sh is Poo ae aa :
ae SE hs a eee ;
oy Sue , Be ah he
oy ee Tne Was fas .
Figure 11-24 Placed block revetment (Vietnam, photo Verhagen)
Asphalt
When the wave attack is severe, an asphalt revetment can be the answer. The
construction demands special equipment and regular inspection for cracks is
necessary. But a well designed, constructed and maintained asphalt revetment is very
strong and reliable. Figure 11-25 shows an example. A filter under an asphalt
revetment is not necessary.
Because asphalt is impermeable (also for air) with a rising waterlevel air may be
trapped under the asphalt layer. This may give unwanted pressure. Therefore in the
crest air vents have been included. To avoid unwanted pressure gradients near the toe,
a gabion structure is included.


292 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Asphalt 0,15 m thick
SEA SIDE Asphalt 0.2 m thick f LAKE SIDE
aa
60m 50m 1 272s +4620m +400
Han Hem Ty rr Z are
25m. 33m 11m 52m \, 20m
193 m
ube Crees th Aa asic
058/035 mth osm
Cation coring und ore
am lam _
+20" +6 =
‘Asphalt Mastic +1000 14 ~w
=
a | Mine Sone vst
a eee
Nylon Fabric a
cand
concrete Sheet Ping
Se
C2mMick Smack
fee! 200 Copperslagblocks 011-012 thick on 003 Gravel
sand g
oe Construction ‘ Fascine taro
Figure 11-25 Dike with asphalt revetment (Brouwersdam)
Grass
When wave attack does not play an important role (waves up to ~ 0.5 m), a grass
revetment or another vegetation with good cover, can be an attractive solution also
from an economical point of view. Grass can stand water for many hours but can not
live under water permanently, so for the lower parts of a revetment, another material
always has to be applied.


11. PROTECTIONS 293
a
Figure 11-26 Dike with grass revetment (Vlieland, photo Waterboard Fryslan)
Rigid structures
Seawalls are usually made of concrete or masonry, see Figure 11-27.
- «
FI 4
[netom, q |
Hees
]
|
x os. Sl
’ ie |
he 2
6 ee
ee
Ror” mer ag ._ oe
Wes i
a a B
e ern ees ae
4 PECL Lge
og gigctthecpes RX.
% ee
Figure 11-27 Seawall (Viissingen. photo Wil Riemers)


294 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
11.4.2 Groynes and breakwaters
The function of groynes is usually maintaining a channel or a coastline. Breakwaters
serve as a protection against waves for a harbour or a coast. Breakwaters are mostly
larger than groynes, but the differences are not strictly defined.
Coastal groynes can serve to reduce the longshore sediment transport and/or to keep
the current velocities away from the shore. In the first case it is not necessary to make
the groyne higher than, say 0.5 to 1 m, above the wanted beach level. Figure 11-28
gives an example of a groyne of this type. Since, in most seas, the sea level goes up
and down with the tides, the zone of wave attack on this type of groyne will also go
up and down. A light stone class, penetrated with asphalt, on a fascine mattress makes
a simple and strong groyne.
05-1m rock 10-60 kg
i ae penetrated with asphalt
fascine mattress
Figure 11-28 Simple, low coastal groyne
When the groyne also keeps the current velocities away from the shore during high
tides, the wave attack will be concentrated on the head of the groyne. In that case there
is hardly any difference with a breakwater. Figure 11-29 shows an example of such a
groyne. A bottom protection will be necessary to keep enough distance between the
scour hole (caused by the current around the head) and the structure.
= Rock 1000-3000 kg
- =z
stone 60-300 kg quarry run
Figure 11-29 Simple, high coastal groyne
For details is referred to Crossman er.al (2003).
11.4.3 Breakwaters
A breakwater can simply be seen as a large groyne. It is then usually cost effective to
compose the cross-section of several stone sizes. Figure 11-30 and Figure 11-31 show
an example.


11. PROTECTIONS 295
Rock 241/942 Typical Cross-Section Breakwater
Rock 200-500 kg *
2506

Fock 24/41 Fock 241/461

STs : Lws
Rock 200-500 kg so ae Rock 200-500 kg

oe i Rock 1-50kg IE

Geotextile with sinking stone 1-5 kg, Gaotextile with sinking stone 1-5 kg

te Width approximately 60 m =

Figure 11-30 Cross-section breakwater (van Oord ACZ)
ie
Pee
ae
I.
BoE *
GUILE SF
Hal TARR CI EE
Wp a pcthen

Figure 11-31 3-dimensional view breakwater cross-section (van Oord ACZ)
Figure 11-32 shows an example of offshore breakwaters as a coastal protection. The
effect of the wave load reduction is clearly visible in the position of the shore line.


296 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
ee SE
RR rct cere meen
= Rag Rios ees sree
- S olan iog 5 iam
> Siar —
pee SS
: a
eS = Sz -
, "ee ar
> —— ace
. eg :
» as Jo Np
‘ia bese oe
: oy .
: <x *. SS
eX Se Sart —
oe Sy
‘
Eas ‘eee Ys
Figure 11-32 Offshore breakwaters (East Beach, Norfolk, Virginia; photo SirFin, Panoramio)
11.5 General aspects revetments
This section treats considerations which are relevant for canal or river banks as well
as shore protections.
11.5.1. Choice
The choice of the type of revetment depends on the availability of materials, the
available space, the other functions of the revetment, the loads, harmonisation with the
landscape ete. Table 11-2 gives a checklist of criteria which can determine the choice.
Table 11-2
Type Criterion Loose Placed | Asphalt Grass
rock blocks
Heavy loads a
Flexibility forsubsidence [HF [eT
Space required [oo oo
[Construction maintenance [+ [Of Te TO
Accessibility a


11. PROTECTIONS 297
Figure 11-33 gives an idea of appropriate sea defence structures for a wide range of
depths and wave heights. Concrete armour units are available in many shapes, such as
Tetrapod, Dolos etc. Treatment is beyond the scope of this book; sce e.g. Verhagen
and d’Angremond, 2009.
seawalls <__ horizontal: application range of vertical
shdat plies ges structures (depth determined)
15;
S )
2 40 H, limited by bt peasy
= breaking o. waves concrete cubes
g wee «ul on
48 oe yore non conerete armour
A a: breaking
waves ‘natural rock
rip rap *
10 20 30 vertical: application range of sloping
> — waterdepth (m) structures (wave determined)
Figure 11-33 Conceptual design of protection (VanderWeiden, 1989)
11.5.2 Transitions
General
Transitions in revetments are inevitable since different locations on the slope often
require different solutions. But at the same time, transitions are vulnerable elements,
damage often starts in these places. This is common knowledge in everyday life:
problems resulting from rain and storm never occur in the middle of a wall but always
at the transition between wall and roof or windows.
A transition can decrease the strength and/or be subjected to an increased load. Figure
11-34a shows the transition between a concrete block revetment and a loose rock
protection. The board is meant to keep the blocks in place. Due to subsidence of the
soil, a split can occur resulting in a decreased strength (unprotected soil under the
blocks). The board may also lead to an increased load: the wave pressures against the
blocks are higher due to locally insufficient drainage, see also Chapter 8.
& LY asphalt
erosion
» blocks
Figure 11-34 Transitions — general aspects
The ideal transition is just as strong and flexible as the adjoining layers. This is very
hard to realise, therefore the following aspects should be considered:


298 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
© Care: possibly the most important aspect. With extra attention during
construction, inspection and maintenance many problems can be avoided.
© Permeability: when there is a difference in permeability of the revetment on both
sides of the transition, the transition should be dimensioned with the difference in
mind, see below.
© Overlap: a split down to the sand should be avoided, there should always be some
overlap between layers, see Figure 11-34b.
Open-open
Figure 11-35a shows a transition between two open revetments with different
permeabilities: concrete blocks and loose rock. The very permeable rock can cause
extra pressure under the blocks. By penetrating the first meter or so of the rock with
asphalt, the wave pressures will penetrate less easily. The support of the blocks above
the transition is guaranteed by the concrete beam, which has a special shape.
©@ open-open (©) open-closed © dosed-closed
beam q
penetration > blocks _~ # geotextile
sane fiter “ge
sae fh pS aad ra
sand fiter | 4" sand ‘asphalt cares
Figure 11-35 Transitions between open and closed revetments
Open-closed
Between the blocks and asphalt in Figure 11-35b there is an overlap in the filter layer
in order to avoid a clear cut seam. Via the blocks, an extra pressure under the asphalt
can build up. The asphalt layer is thicker at the transition to withstand this pressure.
Closed-closed
A filter is not necessary in this case, but a seam down to the sand has to be avoided in
order to prevent a leak with pressure from inside which will cause erosion, see Figure
11-35c.
Many other transitions can be encountered, e.g. between blocks and grass. If cattle
grazes on the slope, the animals can damage the transition. Partially open blocks,
which allow grass to grow through, can serve as a gradual transition.
11.5.3 Toes
Toes are a special kind of transition, i.e. from a slope to a horizontal plane. The same
aspects as in the previous section play a role, but the support function of a toe is an
extra aspect to reckon with.


11. PROTECTIONS: 299
A slope causes a horizontal force at the toe. In a hard bottom this force can easily be
withstood, see Figure 11-36a, but in soft soil it causes deformation of the toe and
possibly erosion or other damage to the revetment, see Figure 11-36b. In that case, a
toe protection against erosion, which is necessary anyway, can be constructed with
stones, which in turn are able to withstand the horizontal force.
ae ——— |
4 "a 8 tig
een SS i —
ee ss :
one pet, ye 5
2 Balke
ee ee
i te aS
be ai eR
a Pr Ne
ote a88 |
— ft
rock soft soil geotextile
Figure 11-36 Horizontal support of slope (photo: revetment with cemented rock in
Cartagena, Colombia, photo Verhagen)
Figure 11-36 also shows a revetment of loose rock, but cemented together on the
outside. Such a structure cannot take any tension. In case of absence of support (case
b) the revetment will slide down and a crack becomes visible along the complete
revetment.
In order to avoid pressure build-up at the toe, a permeable structure can be used at the
toe of a block revetment, see Figure 11-37.
closed f/ é
sheet open
piles pressure piles drainage front
view
Figure 11-37 Drainage at toe


300 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Eroding toes
If the toe of a revetment is subject to erosion, e.g. in the case of an outer bend of a
meandering river, several measures can be taken, see Figure 11-38. In case (a), the
bank is excavated to the expected erosion depth and the revetment is extended during
construction. This is an appropriate, but often expensive solution.
O) 0} ©
falling apron
original i ychi
bottom level jeune apron AE
;
expected -
Seaur depth Tevetment ot a
Figure 11-38 Toe protections in case of expected erosion

In case (b), a mattress or a block mat or any other coherent structure is applied. When
the toe erosion starts, the mattress will hang down in the erosion hole. This is
sometimes called a “launching apron”.
A special type of toe protection shown in Figure 11-38c is the falling apron. This
protection originated from the Indian subcontinent, and is often applied in rivers where
the channel locations are difficult to predict (with braiding rivers). It is a layer of loose
rock without mattress or geotextile. With toe erosion, the loose stones “fall” and cover
the slopes of the scour hole. The stones in the falling apron:
© should be large enough to withstand the possible flow forces
© should be fairly uniform in size: concrete blocks form a fine falling apron. They

are used to create an “imperfect filter” and to allow erosion of the bottom material

through the stones. This is essential in a falling apron: a perfect filter would hinder

erosion through the stones, resulting in an uncontrolled drop of the apron after

some time.
© should have a high density (> 2500 kg/m’). A high density contributes to a better

falling process.
The necessary volume of a falling apron can be estimated with:

V = Ahgdso [m’ ‘| dL)

in which h, is the expected scour depth. Many guidelines give for the constant A a
value between 5 and 7. However, research by Van der Hoeven (2002) and Thiel (2002)
showed that the value of 4 is in the order of 1. This means in fact that one single layer
of stones is formed on the eroding slope. Providing more stones in the “waiting apron”
does not result in a thicker layer. The slope will be in the order of 1:2, independent of
the rock size and the flow velocity.


11. PROTECTIONS 301
Such a one-layer bed protection will certainly not stop erosion. It is an imperfect filter
and will only slow down the erosion. However, when this erosion retardation is
sufficient to survive a flood period, the system may function well. Of course, the
falling apron should be monitored regularly in order to check the erosion and falling
process. Design details can be found in Verhagen et al. (2003) and Froelich (2009).
7 n.d se ||
seca |
new sand slope Esk
a4
pn Fi a ee a ne
Taha AT OTE TOO tl PPPOE sd TPP TPs,
Figure 11-39 Model test with falling apron (van der Hoeven, 2002)




12 NATURAL PROTECTIONS
'
_—* Es
ig OE
Vegetated banks in Flevoland (photo H.J. Verhagen)


304 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

12.1 Introduction

12.1.1. General

Beds, banks and shores are the borders between soil and water. Until some decades
ago, hydraulic engineers were only interested in shaping these boundaries to fight
erosion or to create transshipment possibilities, but growing attention in society to
environmental aspects has lead to an other approach. The transition between land and
water plays an important role in nature and landscape and this awareness also has
consequences for hydraulic engineers. Nature friendly protections have become an
issue worldwide and mono-functional protections are becoming obsolete. Section
12.1.2 contains more background information concerning ecological aspects.
Another environmental aspect is the choice of materials. To prevent pollution, it is no
longer allowed to use certain materials which contain heavy metals or toxic substances.
The choice of material also depends on the laws which are in force in the area where
the project is being executed. In general it can be said that many waste products are
suspicious. Using lead slag is plainly wrong, as it emits too much heavy metal, while
phosphorous slag can be used in a salt water environment but not in fresh water. More
information can be found in CUR200 (1999) and Van Vossen & Verhagen (2009).
Ecology and hydraulic engineering may seem diametrically opposed, but that is not
necessarily so. A navigation canal serves as an example. Tradition or the available
space and funds often decided that a canal’s banks should be constructed with sheet
piles. The ecological functions of a canal with sheet-pile banks are seriously hindered
since the vertical banks offer no room at all for flora and fauna. But navigation on such
acanal can also be unpleasant. Due to the vertical walls, the ship’s wave action persists
for a long time and when there is much traffic, the canal water slosh which particularly
hinders small ships. So, there is not necessarily a contradiction between these interests.
Another example is the presence of vegetation as natural protection. Leaving this
vegetation unspoilt can save a lot of money.

Nowadays always measures are taken in order to mitigate negative effects. A good
example with guidelines to mitigate negative effects can be found in PIANC99 (2008).
Another approach to protections is also a challenge for hydraulic engineers. It is also
possible to design the interface of land and water in such way that the ecological
quality is not only mitigated, but even enhanced. A new set of boundary conditions
enters the field of protection design, making it more interesting. Also in research, a
new field of attention has come into the picture since the effect of vegetation on load
and strength has led to fusions like eco-engineering or engineering biology. Sections
2, 3 and 4 of this chapter contain examples of this new approach.


12. ENVIRONMENT 305
12.1.2 Ecology
General
Ecology is the science that deals with the mutual relations between living organisms
and their relations with the environment. This science has become more and more
important during the last decades. One does not need to be an environmentalist to know
that economic development has several side effects which can form a threat to mankind
in the long run. Man, being a living organism, is also part of ecosystems. Banks and
shores are part of larger watersystems, like rivers or lakes. Healthy functioning of such
a system is a prerequisite for all other interests related to that watersystem. If a
watersystem is not a stable ecosystem, the supply of water as raw material for drinking
water, for fisheries or recreation etcetera is also endangered.
In 2000 the European Union has issued the EU Water Framework Directive
(Kaderrichtlijn Water). It introduces a legislative approach to managing and protecting
water, based not on national or political boundaries but on natural geographical and
hydrological formations: river basins. It also requires coordination of different EU
policies, and sets out a precise timetable for action for getting all European waters into
good condition. In order to achieve the targets of this directive, the managing
authorities of water courses have to guarantee a healthy (water) ecosystem. The
implementation of nature friendly shorelines will give a considerable contribution to a
healthy ecosystem.
Reducing pollution is a necessary condition but it is not sufficient to achieve a healthily
functioning ecosystem. E.g. introducing salmon back into the Rhine requires more than
reducing industrial discharges, it is also necessary to create banks and other quiet
places where fish can spawn. So, a little knowledge of ecology can do no harm to a
hydraulic engineer.
Ecological infrastructure
On a planning level one can discern several elements in an ecological infrastructure,
see Figure 12-1:
© Nature reserves
Areas where certain species can live in more or less ideal circumstances. These
areas are large enough to aid as long term conservation of certain populations.
© Ecological connections
These connections can serve certain species or are of more general use. When
the connections do not function satisfactorily, fragmentation will follow,
especially for species which are less mobile, have a low rate of reproduction or
live in small numbers.
© Stepping stones
If the distance between nature reserves is too large, a stepping stone in between
can be of use for the dispersion of species. These areas are suitable as a


306 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
temporary living area, but they are too small to allow a population to stay
healthy in the long run.
ee : GBB seeppIng stone
a «
natu j —
Figure 12-1 Ecological infrastructure
Banks play a role in ecological connections, but can also serve as stepping stone for
certain species.
a ny Ie ee eT
z eg ee : ——
. = >
Figure 12-2 River as ecological connection with stepping stones (photo Rijkswaterstaat)


12. ENVIRONMENT 307
Dynamics
Like people, plants and animals have their preference for a certain degree of dynamics.
Nature offers a high variety of circumstances, from quiet ponds to rapids and surf
zones. Figure 12-3 shows the relation between dynamics and the well being of
organisms.
\ number of VE.
number organisms ;
of species per species |
Pan
:
:
——————_ dynamics
Figure 12-3 Species and dynamics
Many species can live in a moderately dynamic area but the number of organisms per
species will be small. In a highly dynamic environment, only few species can live but
the number of organisms per species will be high. If an area is too dynamic, nothing
can live. An example of the latter is a beach, where waves break and the environment
demands so much of organisms that it is not suitable for plants or animals as a habitat.
A little less dynamic are tidal flats, where mangrove trees can stand the waves and
shellfish can live under the surface. Every part of the flats is dry or wet during a
different percentage of time, depending on the height with regard to the tides. And in
every part only a few species can meet the environmental demands. Per square meter,
however, numerous organisms of a certain species can be found. Another example can
be found in dunes, where the slopes that are exposed to the sun have few species, while
the other side of the dune, in the shadow, shows a much greater variation.
With regards to banks and shores, it is clear that a steep, stony slope exposed to wave
action is nota suitable habitat for most organisms and measures to reduce the dynamics
are necessary to create better living conditions.
Banks and ecosystems
Banks are part of larger ecosystems. They form the transition from water to land and
vice versa and show characteristics of both. For many species, both aquatic and
terrestrial, banks are vital. Fish use shallow parts to spawn or to hide between plants.


308 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
o a a ;
er — =e y
ne ea oe oe 7
Pees See sors
ta nae vF —~eT en 2
ay Cee
BS. yee
'B
B
A-A BB
Figure 12-4 Crossing location for mammals (photo CUR)
Insects live on aquatic plants, birds look for food or rest while mammals come to drink
or feed. A gradual transition offers more opportunities for species to survive and to
migrate. A canal with sheet pile banks is impossible to cross for mammals, like deer.
Figure 12-4 shows possible solutions to overcome this problem. Such locations where
animals can leave the main watercourse are not only of importance for large mammals.
For example beavers also cannot cross sheetpiles. They want to make there boroughs
in still standing water with an entrance below the waterlevel. Wet zones behind a
sheetpile are ideal, but some access is needed. See Figure 12-5.
When dealing with a design for any bank, one should be aware of what is possible in
a certain area. Natural banks in other comparable areas can serve as a reference. The
other functions of the bank, like recreation, also have to be taken into account. A
stepwise approach can help to draw up a final plan in which future maintenance and
monitoring should also be included. The relation between construction and
maintenance costs can be different for nature friendly banks, which can actually be
cheaper.
Figure 12-6 shows the various steps in the realization of a nature friendly bank project.
It starts with a vision of what is wanted and what is possible and advances with the
usual steps. Very import in the development of a vision is the so-called target scenario.
In all natural systems there is a natural succession. When an area is just reclaimed the
fist species are pioneers. They grow quick and fast, but are replaced after some time


12. ENVIRONMENT 309
by other species. Finally in most port of the world a forest is the final stable situation.
In banks vegetation starts to grow, plants day, decompose into peat and eventually the
water becomes land (in Dutch it is called verlanden in German Verlandung). Reed and
other vegetation are growing, and finally a (relatively wet) type of land will remain,
and there will be no real watercourse any more. This is usually not the target scenario,
but in order to prevent that such final, stable situation will occur, regular maintenance
is needed.

W Ve be 7 ae
ly By 2. 2 =
Ags. ® oS =
A RG ee /
7 % * =s : a: 2 a! (
Ny ‘ e-S : p
UNE i i mms Qa e
ry Gi ‘ f
OME age: .
ie ape re ;
( se ;
h é Lt er ee
Su RNB) b, WY ys =
AUN Wi \ Hy
N\ We
AY UR \ Rh. fil Se) 5
Wh. \ i
Sy 2
is . iY \ / |
SIN
LX { Ap,
Figure 12-5 Gap in a sheetpile, in this case especially to allow beavers to cross the sheetpile
(photo Verhagen)
One of the challenges of ecological management is that in fact one wants to “freeze”
a dynamic succession system. This is only possible with active management (i.e. good
maintenance).
Therefore already in the first stage of the project, some thought is already given to
maintenance, monitoring and evaluation. This is even more necessary than in “normal”
bank protection projects since the functioning of a nature friendly bank requires
attention throughout its life but particularly in the first years.
Part of the maintenance can be done by nature itself. Beavers cut trees, large grazers
remove young seedlings of trees, etc. But also artificial maintenance (e.g. mowing of
reed) is needed. Such maintenance should be planned carefully. One should not cut all
the reed along the whole watercourse in one operation. It is much better to do this in
block of a couple of 100 meters, and cut the other part of the reed in the next year. In
this way species depending on the existence of the reed may survive the mowing
operation.


310 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

vision on bank

management,

reference situations,

ambitions,

target other functions
scenario TTT
corsmucion
Figure 12-6 Planning and execution steps
12.1.3 Load and strength
During extreme conditions any protection can be damaged requiring maintenance.
Chapter 1 stated that erosion only needs to be prevented if it harms certain interests.
Gain and loss are normal phenomena for a bank or shore in a natural situation and
something similar can be said for nature friendly protections. If vegetation serves as
protection, some loss can occur which is acceptable as long as the protected interests
are not endangered and the vegetation can recover after the extreme load.
load
scour Hs
Figure 12-7 Load and strength

Vegetation as a protection can both reduce loads and increase strength. Vegetation has
a relatively large resistance to waves and currents, thus reducing the loads. Roots can
increase the strength by protecting the grains on a micro scale or by reinforcing them.
Figure 12-7 shows vegetation with wave load. The outside plants are “front soldiers”
and have to withstand a higher load than the inside plants. At the front, due to the high
velocities, scour can also occur if the roots are not able to retain the soil. The effect
can be that the outside plants are damaged or disappear. As long as the number of
soldiers is large enough, the battle can still be won. When there is enough time to
recover before the next extreme event, the protection will function well. If not, some
extra protection, e.g. a stone dam, will be needed.


12. ENVIRONMENT 314
12.2 Bed protections
12.2.1 General
Bed protections are situated completely under water, so from an ecological point of
view, bed protections seem to be of little interest. However, in contrast with stone
revetments, bottom protections of loose rock can even ecologically improve the
original situation. Shells and other organisms can easily attach themselves to or hide
in between large stones, creating new ecological opportunities.
12.2.2 Fascine mattresses
Chapter 11 mentioned that geotextile is necessary for the filter function of a fascine
mattress, since twigs or reed have a low critical gradient (only a few percent parallel
to the bottom). Some research has been done to find a natural material to replace this
geotextile (Lemmens, 1996).
\. | ="
———————— SSS
aan: Wa eee Y
BRIO OO
oi aw! ei - fabric
sand
Figure 12-8 Filter tests for nature friendly fascine mattress
Figure 12-8 shows the test set-up to investigate the critical gradient for various natural
fabrics. A geotextile was used as a reference in order to compare the results with
existing solutions.
It appears that it is possible to find substitutes for geotextiles. A reed mat (nr 4) has
the same critical gradient as a geotextile that can be penetrated by roots of plants (nr
3), which is favourable when it is used not as a bed protection but on a slope. Jute with
woodpulp (nr 8) can stand the same gradient as high quality geotextile (nr 2) which
can not be penetrated by roots and which can be used in cases where high quality
demands hold for bottom protections.
Fabrics like jute, coconut or other natural cloth can be found in many places. The
problem is the durability which is usually not more than a few months when applied
ona slope in the air-water-sunshine zone. Under water it can possibly last much longer
but experiments need to be done to find out.


312 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Table 12-1: critical gradients for various types of filters
Nr. ] Type of fabric Critical
gradient (%)

[1 [None (classical fascine mattress)

Synthetic geotextile (not penetrable for roots)

Synthetic geotextile (penetrable for roots)

[4 [Reed (classical filter cloth in fascine mattresses) |

Coconut fibre cloth

Coconut fibre cloth filled with 4 cm of woodpulp [4 |

[8 _ [Jute cloth filled with 4 cm of woodpulp
12.3 Bank protections
12.3.1 General
Riverbanks and canal banks have to be protected against currents and/or waves. Focus
in this section will be on the protection against waves. Under water usually the
vegetation may decrease the load on the subsoil, but usually not the resistance against
erosion by current or waves. Above water grass roots may increase the strength of the
soil, but only when the vegetation really forms a mat.

—+# Be
B =
Figure 12-9 Basic types of bank protection

As already indicated in Section 12.1.2, a gradual transition from water to land is one
of the keywords in a nature friendly design. This means a gentle slope in the first place,
so, nature friendly bank protections need space! In small waters it can be enough to
create a gentle slope and wait for the vegetation to grow or to help somewhat by sowing


12. ENVIRONMENT 313
or planting. In rivers or canals this will usually not be enough. With increasing loads
one can think of reinforced vegetation as a protection or load reduction in front of the
bank. Figure 12.9 shows basic types of bank protection. A is a fully natural shoreline,
B is an underwater protection, C is an offshore protection creating a shallow zone, and
Disa protection where vegetation can grow trough.

Some examples are given in the following sections.
12.3.2 Vegetation
Loads
Vegetation, such as reed, rush, willow trees or other aquatic plants can reduce both
waves and current velocities. The orbital wave motion flows around reed stalks and
bends them to and fro, making wave reduction a very complex process. Completely
stiff stalks are most effective as wave reductors. Bending in the wave direction makes
reed less effective, but vibrations perpendicular to the wave direction again cause a
greater reduction due to a larger resistance to the orbital motion (Kortlever, 1994;
Klok, 1996). Finally, the internal friction inside the stalks also absorbs some energy.
With all these factors it is not yet possible to determine the wave reduction analytically
or even numerically. Empirical research has produced the following result for wave
transmission (CUR 200,199):

Ky HE -1-|1-e9{ oon" (12.1)

Hy cos B

in which: N is the number of stalks per m?, B is the width of the vegetation and cos
is the angle of incidence of the waves (0° for waves perpendicular to the bank, ~ 55°
for ship waves), see Figure 12-10a which shows the wave transmission for various
values of N. The values found with Equation (12.1) are valid for reed stalks in the
growing season. In other seasons, depending on the length and appearance of the reed,
the wave transmission can reach much higher values and there is hardly any wave
reduction left. So, the performance of reed as wave reductor depends on the season,
hence only if the load is also seasonal (e.g. recreational navigation) this is a suitable
solution.
With regard to what has been said in Section 12.1.3 concerning load and strength,
Equation (12.1) is valid for waterdepths up to 1 m and waves up to 0.4 m. For trees,
the same equation can be applied with a higher, but yet unknown maximum wave
height.


314 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
1 dt
4 ae
~t
- | 3
i ht |
f n't |
a
i
=~
ra a a, — 2
«oil ic dodge
H
1 — ft tH
+>———— 8 ——+
ce) ee oe
Nie ony > — be
= gf S| |g no
° a N_/ *¥---4 é ee Y |
SJ Sie ae
wot Ks > mee SE Eee
0 5 10 15 20 oO 05 1.0 1s 2.0
© —> Bim © him
Figure 12-10 Wave damping and roughness in reed (photo Boeters)
Vegetation also reduces the current velocity. The equivalent Chezy-value for
vegetation has been found to be (CUR 200, 1999):
&
Cree =,/ S— (12.2)
“8 Y0.5NDh
in which D is the diameter of the stalks and h is the waterdepth. Figure 12-10b shows
the results for various values of N. Note that the C-values are very low compared with
values found in open channel flow. This C-value has no relation with the logarithmic
velocity profile in uniform flow but is just an algebraic parameter to be used in
relations like:


12. ENVIRONMENT 315
Cree
Uyeg = open (12.3)
sg = Uopen
Copen ‘ h Mopen
as was treated in Chapter 2 and in which the subscript open stands for the values outside
the vegetation.
Strength
In Section 12.1.3, load and strength were discussed. From the previous examples it has
become clear that vegetation can function as a load reductor. Increase of strength is
not self-evident: a tree or a plant, standing in a current, is comparable to a cylinder
which causes erosion as we know from Chapter 4. Hence, increase of strength has to
be the result of something else. The roots of trees and plants appear to function as a
bottom protection. It is, however, not very clear yet how this works, because the
question is whether the roots reduce the load around the stem or serve as armouring of
the soil.
MD ch 2m
£ &B
» ome EA!
a Eh
6 tl A
—_untoursie’ NES
condition dr
54 ~">Saturated \ 4
condition - AIS 10m
ees ws
= + c= 5 kN/m? y
s B
3s s
ig with
3 vagetaton
2, ects
€
i —
2. Without =
se __ vegetation
a dzetion
° —
30 3s ry ra 50
Slope angle, p*
Figure 12-11 Roots as armour against sliding
Anyhow, roots appear to reduce the scour around trees. Dorst, 1995, did some research
on scour of a sand bottom with willow trees, with and without roots. He found a
reduction of 40 % of the scour depth with roots only directly around the stem,
compared with the same stems without roots, With a root system extending much
further from the stem (some trees develop a sort of root mats), the reduction was even
larger (= 75%).
Note that this scour was superficial scour. Scour on a channel slope is usually not
provented at all by vegetation.


316 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Vegetation also influences the resistance against sliding. The roots clearly armour the
soil, see Figure 12-11 from Coppin and Richards, 1990.
Grass
Grass and other herb-like vegetation require special attention. Grass cannot grow under
water, but can stand current and wave loads for many hours depending on the
magnitude of the load. This section on bank protection treats current velocities. Wave
loads are treated with shore protections in Section 12.4.3.
EE ————————
£ moderate ——
c es
§ es es
3 a SS
a |
y .
Po ||
2 10 4} 4
a ———————
= SS Sh PS i, SS Se |
€ eS SS A SS
g CT SN
a poor —"<——*s| —\—}|__]
] | ee Ne
ny
s~_NN K
0 1 2 3 4 5
——> u (ms)
Figure 12-12 Permissible flow duration on grass cover
Figure 12-12 shows a graph with permissible flow velocities and their duration. Grass
can stand very high velocities for a short period of time or lower velocities for several
days. If the current velocity is low, the water flows through the grass. If the velocity
increases, the leaves flatten on the soil and cover it, thus increasing the protection.
Note that Figure 12-12 has been developed for permanent flow; in case of overtopping
by waves grass behaves differently.
Section 12.4.3 elaborates the effect of overtopping, as well as the relation between
management and grass quality.
12.3.3 Vegetation with reinforcing mats
If the wave or current loads exceed those of the previous section, a fascine mattress or
some other artificial mat can reinforce the slope. Figure 12-13 shows the concept: a
(thin) fascine mattress, or similar structure such as a gabion or composite mattress,
increases revetment’s strength. Only a single layer of stone is applied in order not to
hinder plant growth. The formulas of Chapter 8 are used to calculate the dimensions,
but a margin should be taken into account since only one layer is applied. When the
plants are fully grown, the roots can serve to retain the soil, but at the beginning, some


12. ENVIRONMENT 317
filter is needed. A degradable geotextile, as mentioned in Section 12.2.2, can solve this
problem.

—
_ ~ ~~ —
r —————————
“3 7 - SS
3. % :
Ary @é%
Re “» Sita
Vy
Di dcp
Loe
—= ete
a Ope
EF
lage
a
oO
LX
asoe
Figure 12-13 Reinforced vegetation
12.3.4 Load reductors
When the wave loads are definitely too great for vegetation to survive, a load reductor
in front of the bank is necessary to create an environment in which aquatic plants can
flourish. The strip behind the wave reductor then becomes a quiet area. To refresh the
water in the strip, the exchange of water between canal or river and the strip should be
possible. Figure 12-14 shows some examples of load reductors. (a) is a low protection
(sheet piles or a stone dam), see Chapter 7 for some numbers for wave reduction. (b)
represents sheet piles with holes under water at regular intervals along the canal, (c) is
a protection with its crest above water, but with interruptions along the length of the
canal.


318 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
aw
y iy SS
a :
ba | Vv
= =
canal strip cross sections
Ci
AR% KY ASX AMX Y
RK ASE BARS YG
tr tax Yeo
BEEK Pre Sy — ste Se Re
plan views
Figure 12-14 Strip with aquatic plants behind wave reductor (photo Loonbedrijf Martijn van
Nieuwkoop)
This means that, locally, the wave attack on the bank will be high again. To prevent
damage to the vegetation, a solution as presented in (d) is a possibility, asking again
for slightly more space. Note that the cross-sections (a) and (b) and the plan views (c)
and (d) do not match. They represent different solutions.
Ina river or lake, wind waves and currents have to take care of the exchange of water
in the strip. Since these phenomena also form the threat to the bank and vegetation
stability, a subtle compromise between load and protection needs to be found and
should always be tested in a real situation.


12. ENVIRONMENT 319

0.1

me PV A eee

0.1 — waterlevel in canal (m)

-0.2) ---- waterlevel in strip

0.3 =

0.3

0.2 discharge through

aperture (m’/s)
0.1
0.1
0 50 . 100 150
time (s)
Figure 12-15 Exchange of water in strip due to passing ship

These wave reductors and strips can be constructed in a navigation channel where the
loads are caused by the ship waves. To refresh the water inside the strip, the energy of
the passing ships can be applied. The main engine behind the exchange of water is the
primary wave, see Figure 12-15. The waterlevel depression in the canal causes an
outflow through the apertures in the protection, after which a gradual inflow occurs,
refreshing some of the water in the strip. The apertures should be located at regular
intervals (order of magnitude 50 — 100 m, also depending on the intensity of the
navigation). See CUR, 1999 for more details.
Often, water exchange also causes sedimentation inside the strip which can hardly be
prevented. A deep part near the apertures seems the most appropriate measure to deal
with this aspect. Sedimentation mainly takes place in this part, making maintenance
easier (Hooijmeijer, 1998).
12.4 Shore protections
12.4.1. Mangroves
Mangrove forests are the natural vegetation of many tropical coasts and tidal inlets,
they form a highly productive ecosystem, a nursery for many marine species.
Mangrove trees miraculously thrive in very dynamic circumstances. They can cope
with salt water where as most other plants cannot. Seedlings have little opportunity to
settle, so mangroves are viviparous, giving birth to an almost complete tree in a capsule
(the propagule) that can travel with the tide and can turn into an upright standing young
tree within a few days.


320 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
salt marshes mangroves mud flats
PEEL OLY ED VVY A, I k rai HW
~1:200- 1:300 hcl, ~1:1000 MSL
Figure 12-16 Cross-section coast with mangroves
Figure 12-16 gives a typical cross-section of a mud coast with mangrove vegetation.
There is an increasing awareness of the importance and vulnerability of mangrove
forests. These forests are also a natural coastal protection and where they are removed,
for whatever reason, erosion and/or artificial protection is the price to be paid. Planting
these vegetable breakwaters everywhere, however, is not a very promising concept.
Mangroves can only exist on coasts with a moderate wave climate (Taal, 1994). This
is mainly because the seedlings cannot settle in highly dynamic conditions, Once the
trees are grown up, however, they can even stand an occasional storm.
There is a wealth of literature on mangroves, but little from a physical or coastal
engineering point of view. From a hydraulic engineering point of view, an insight into
the influence of mangrove forests on wave transmission and coastal stability is of great
interest.
One of the most striking visible features of mangroves is the root system. Because
mangroves usually live in anaerobic conditions in the mud soil, they improve their gas
exchange with the atmosphere by means of aerial roots. Of the many mangrove species
in the world, the two most important are Avicennia and Rhizophora. These species
have completely different aerial roots. Rhizophora has “prop"-roots or "stilt"-roots,
while Avicennnia grows "snorkel"-type pneumatophores, which emerge vertically
from the bottom, see Figure 12-17. These roots play an important role in wave
damping, probably even more than the trunks of the trees.
AVICENNIA RHIZOPHORA
Pneumatophores Stilt roots
Figure 12-17 Mangrove roots
With this breathing system, mangrove trees need fresh air regularly and for this reason
they can only live in the upper tidal zone, approximately above Mean Sea Level up to
High Water (Spring) Level. They can stand storm surges, but after extremely long
periods of flooding, drowning of mangroves has been reported (Taal, 1994) and even
suffocation when large quantities of sediment have covered the root systems during a
storm. Below MSL, the seedlings cannot settle and at higher levels, the mangroves
cannot compete with other plant species. The coastline in front of mangroves often


12. ENVIRONMENT 321
consists of mud flats with typical slopes of approximately 1:1000. Behind the
mangroves, between HWS-level and the level of occasional flooding by the ocean, salt
marshes can be found with halophytic (salt-loving) herbs and grasses, before the
"normal" vegetation starts, see Figure 12-16. The width of these tidal forests (with
typical slopes of about 1:200 - 1:300) is determined mainly by the tidal range (which
can vary from a few decimetres to more than 5 meters along tropical coasts).

‘ : Pe ee ; ey? f F
SEAS op oe He j
Sse nok
Sis | eee FS oa SS | j ‘
: pe ee ean ees eS Sis?
a8 3r, ae Ter = | AD c t
TAP Seema) SRE. em. See | : :
; a fod weet} Aye
5 ee ST A RSE DE ah
abe Mf a
hg Bey fh ed itt
£ { a, ia 7 ‘
2) i Lg Te bere
Sy ‘ @
Vy y MSR. Neen
AV YZ, ee Poe eS Fg
By Aes Lasse: t SN NS a rs
i > S prey Sp G3 fx. ~ ee Te
es | ogee Lage / 4 = St
yy en ee © apy Be Pascs>
ere / K =r = a Ds ih : -
Pesta A eee Be: ae ae yp) i
a Oe hi =e (Bz AA.
SP) Wiad Spo or asta pee S44 >
a Sy SP Ca ee es ee
cA NP h a. ee head = da st =
ae = So ripen ae | te 4) aes
oF Paha, IRE RR nae oF oes o :
& oe ia ie. Sae i LM Sa
OE at OE es =
Figure 12-18 Rhizophora mangrove trees (photo Verhagen)
At Delft University of Technology a study concerning the wave transmission in man-
grove forests was carried out, see Schiereck and Booij, 1995. Based on the hydro-
dynamical damping of waves around cylinders the effect of stems and roots of
mangroves was estimated. Since there is a lot of variation in dimensions and density
of the vegetation, three typical cases were discerned: a sparse, an average and a dense
vegetation, see Figure 12-19 where the wave transmission is defined as Kr= Hr/H;,
the transmitted wave height divided by the incoming wave height. The reduction coef-
ficient Kr is dimensionless, but depends on the width of the mangrove belt, see Figure
12-19.


322 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
‘ | | | |
08
hs avon feo pene
og | sparse” _
04 2
02 eet |
0.0 Ff |
0.0 05 1.0 15 20
———_ waterdepth (m)
Figure 12-19 Wave transmission through 100 m of mangroves
In international literature also the relative wave height reduction r is used. The relation
between r and Kis given by:

Kr(x)=e™ (12.4)
where x is the width of the mangrove belt. The value of r depends on the density of the
mangrove trees:

Table 12-2: wave reduction coefficient for mangrove forests
easily oF the mangeoves
dense 0.010
average 0.007
sparse 0.004
Based on field observations, Quynh, 2010 found a statistical relation between r and
some forest parameters:

r=—0.0123 +0.016/y, +0.001771n(10000N) +0.00777 In(C.) (12.5)
in which hy, is the average height of the trees in the forest [3 < hir< 5 (m) ], Nis the
number of trees per ha [ 0.1 < N < 0.2 (trees/m?)], and C- is the canopy density of the
forest [0.8 < C. < 0.99 ]'. Physically the height of the tree has no relation to the wave
damping, but the stem diameter has. There is a correlation between stem diameter and
tree height, and tree heights are much easier to determine in the field.

‘In the original research of Quynh the formula used the number of trees per ha, realise that 10000
trees/ha = 1 tree/m?.


12. ENVIRONMENT 323
Example 12-1
Design waterlevel at a certain location is 3 m above datum. Wave height in front of the
mangrove field (at the sea side) is Hs= 2 m, T= 6 s. Allowable overtopping over the dike is
10 V/s (which implies a good quality grass on the inner slope of the dike). Allowable wave
height on the outer grass slope is 0.5 m. For a dike with a 1:3 slope this means a dike
height of 3.6 m above datum.
Without mangrove reduction, the dike height has to be 6.4 m above datum, and a protection
with concrete blocks is needed.
In order to obtain a wave height reduction from 2 m to 0.5 m a reduction coefficient K: = 0.25
is needed. The planting process is expected to lead to an average dense mangrove forest
(r= 0.007). For obtaining a K:= 0.25 one needs a mangrove belt of 200 m width.
Using the method of Quynh, and assuming that 80% canopy coverage will be achieved at
‘the end, and that the average tree height will become 4 m, a belt of 350 m is needed,
planted with 800 trees per ha.
With a wave energy model (Holthuijsen ef al, 1989) the energy dissipation on several
slopes was computed for the mangrove forests, as shown in Figure 12-19. If the energy
dissipation per unit area is assumed, slopes of 1:100 to 1:300 are found for mangroves
and 1:1000 to 1:2000 for mud flats. These numbers are roughly in line with what is
found in nature, see Figure 12-16.
fo 3) 2 NDI fa ITC Rae err ee ree Peer Ue Uv]
| tia ital di lla iat
A 2) ae ae |
Ai tae CT hy ace :
Pee RN Rae” Cm fm R ‘s
\ 338
Figure 12-20 Mangrove reforestation with wave load reductor
The significance of these findings follows from Figure 12-16. When the mangroves
are removed, the slope will become ~ 1:1000 leading to a regression of the coastline
of many hundreds of meters. So, indeed, where a natural protection is present, one


324 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
should preserve it. Reforestation is difficult and can require temporary protection, see
Figure 12-20, see also next section on load reduction.
12.4.2 Load reduction
When the loads on a shore cause too much erosion, a load reductor in front of the shore
can sometimes be a solution. A rockfill dam is a hard protection, but the original shore
behind it can stay intact and can serve as a recreational beach and/or the original flora
and fauna can be maintained or introduced a second time. An example is a coast where
mangroves were originally present, but have been removed. To restore the vegetation,
a temporary protection is necessary. Chapter 7 mentions wave transmission across
dams related to the relative cress height, regardless of the width and slope. Equation
(12.6) describes the experimental results:
H B 0.31
a2) (1-exp(-0.58)) Fam (12.6)
IT I
Fam in this equation represents the dam type for which Table 12-3 gives some values:
Table 12-3
Dam type Rock Gabions Closed (asphalt or
pitched blocks
A
—_ el
|
x
de
Ay 7 |
‘ we
Figure 12-21 Wave reductor


12, ENVIRONMENT 325
Figure 12-22 shows some results of Equation (12.6). (a) shows the results for various
crest widths (the minimum width in Equation (12.6) should be taken B/H;= 1) and €=
2. A greater width, of course, gives a lower transmission. (b) shows the results for
various & and B/H;= 1; a larger & (steeper slope or less steep waves) gives more
transmission.
1.0 ® 1.0 ®
HyIH, NI BH, = 5.2.1 )
Hoe St RSS
05 ‘SS os RS
= WS NS
A
a | a |
a ar | 0 1 a Osa 0 1 2
——> hil, ——> hs,
Figure 12-22 Wave transmission over low-crested dams
In order to facilitate the exchange of water and animals, apertures at regular intervals
are necessary, see Figure 12-23.

- prevailing wind directions \/
—_—” Cc > Gala
Figure 12-23 Water exchange possibilities

12.4.3 Grass dikes and revetments

Grass can stand amazingly high current velocities and waves, provided the duration of
the loads is limited and the grass is well managed. In the Netherlands much research
on the strength of grass has been carried out, which is summarized in TAW, 1997.
Since 2005 new research with focus on overtopping waves has been initiated. See for
example Steendam et al., 2010.

Figure 12-24 shows grass on a clay layer. The upper layer with the roots is called turf.
The strength of grass comes mainly from the roots. Evenly distributed and healthy
grass roots provide a strong cover layer. The strength is greatly influenced by the
degree of fertilization. Much manure gives “lazy” grass with weak roots, while grass
that gets little manure has to work hard for its food and gets long and strong roots.


326 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
x) turf
; iS
leaves AS
( I” ~ roots
pe clay layer
Figure 12-24 Grass and clay layer
The load and strength mechanisms are a combination of the features treated for asphalt
layers and block revetments. The wave impact is absorbed by the deformation of the
turf and clay layer, while the retracting waves cause waterpressures from inside as is
the case for a block revetment, see Figure 12-25.
wave impact
retracting
si
tet
Figure 12-25 Load and strength of grass under wave attack
Erosion of grass in waves has been investigated, see TAW, 1997 and can be described
with:
d d
tax => = ——> (12.7)
yE ycpHs
in which d is the turf thickness, E is the erosion speed and yis a safety coefficient. cz
represents the quality of the grass:
Table 12-4
Grass quality
ce (10° I/ms) 0.5—1.5 1.5-2.5 2.5-3.5
Figure 12-26 shows the results of Equation (12.7) for d = 0.05 m and y= 2. Grass
layers on dikes can stand waves with Hy = 1.5 mas long as the quality of the grass is


12, ENVIRONMENT 327
good and the storm does not last longer than several hours. This makes grass an
excellent cover for the higher parts of the dikes where waves occur only occasionally.
When the waves are higher than 1.5 m, the zone of maximum wave attack should be
covered with stone or asphalt, but grass still can be applied in the run-up zone. Good
grass layers can stand waves lower than 0.4 m for several days, so in estuaries or rivers
with a limited fetch, grass dikes can be a good alternative for the higher parts (grass
can never live under water permanently).

es
A ————
a& ES —— ———
a> FO" SE hos
7
Eo soll See
as SS ———————
———
a a a
[K—-— -$ te ee
7 ee ee | |
0 02 #04 O06 08 10 12 14 16
——* _H,(m)
Figure 12-26 Permissible duration of wave load and grass quality
As previously mentioned, the quality of the grass, and more in particular the roots,
depends heavily on the degree of fertilization. So, intensive grazing by cattle reduces
the quality significantly. Moreover, cattle damage the grass layer with their hoofs.
There is, however, no contradiction between nature and strength. Without manure, the
grass is stronger and a larger biodiversity can be expected. Many herbs and flowers
then flourish in grass. The biodiversity can be used as a measure of the quality of the
grass, providing a visual tool for inspection, see TAW, 1997 and Sprangers, 1999.
Inner slopes
Grass on inner slopes may fail either by sliding of the surface layer or by erosion of
the top layer. Infiltration tests have shown that for slopes of 1:4 and more gentle, the
sliding is difficult to induce (Van Hoven, 2010), but slopes steeper than 1:3 it is a very
serous failure mechanism.
From 2008 a number of tests have been done with a wave overtopping simulator. This
machine simulates the overtopping on an inner slope on fall scale. These tests showed
that even bad quality grass was able to withstand considerable overtopping (more than
10 Vs per meter). However, on places where grass was absent (small holes in the grass
cover, next to staircases, around piles, trees and fences) erosion started. Because of
that the permissible load on an inner slope cannot be decreased too much. Presently
one should not allow more than 5 I/s per meter overtopping on grass slopes.


328 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
As already indicated in Chapter 7, recent research indicates that a more relevant load
parameter for grass covers is the cumulative overload, instead of the average
overtopping discharge.
SHUEY £ RORY BED YP 7
BRENT YS NY BS Bi | 7
PE AWA lls \y ie: A E
“2S LEW ie rani ; :
lo Ne Nae (a
aft | Pa y
is ae q
a, r a

] P ssi

. a _

Figure 12-27 Overtopping Simulator (photo Infram)

12.4.4 Design based on ecology
In recent years the ecological design of shore protection structures such as dikes and
breakwaters has been the focus of much research and development. One key concept
that has emerged is that the structures themselves (traditionally seen as ‘hard’, man-
made, and unnatural), may actually serve as rich sources of ecological developments.
For instance, marine organisms such as mussels, barnacles, seaweed and algae can
grow on the hard rock substrate, and the pores between armour elements can serve as
crevices in which animals like shrimp and starfish can find shelter. These in turn attract
higher organisms like fish and birds. The essence of this approach to ecological design
is that with relative minor adaptations this environmental function of hard structures
can be enhanced, for instance by careful selection of rock / pore size, applying material
with rough surfaces to encourage marine growth or deliberately creating small lower-
laying areas in toe protection or scour aprons that can serve as tidal pools. Among
other things, this has led to the development of artificial concrete armour elements
with special rough surfaces. At present, several pilot projects with this type of
ecologically designed shore protections are ongoing in the Netherlands.
Another approach, which takes ecological design of coastal protection structures yet
one step further, is to take environmental and biological interests into account in the
functional design of the structures, together with the traditional interests such as flood
risk or harbour operations. This means for instance to ensure that overtopping flow


12. ENVIRONMENT 329
velocities on the rear side of a breakwater are low enough for organisms to grow, or
create well-balanced circulation patterns behind detached structures (Zanuttigh ef al.
2010).




13 CONSTRUCTION
i ——S =—
sf ss
a
—_— ar, PTs
nwa > — . = = os
_ = AA ~~
ie 7%
L “=. yy +
nt
ee
Construction of a beach groyne (courtesy Boskalis)


332 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

13.1 Introduction

This chapter treats some aspects of the construction of protection structures. Section
13.2 starts with an overview of some equipment, while the execution methods of bed,
bank and shore protection works will be treated in Sections 13.3, 13.4 and 13.6
respectively. Section 13.7, finally, deals with quality assurance.

All engineers are confronted with the practical sides of construction, but hydraulic
engineers, like farmers and fishermen, are also heavily depenent on nature. Working in
(flowing) water and in changing weather conditions makes things a lot more
complicated. In tidal waters, the work is dominated by the rhythm of the tides,
particularly in the zone between HW level and LW level. Waterborne operations are
sensitive to wave conditions which influence the workability, the construction method
and even the design. Some parts of a structure are loaded during construction or repair
in acompletely different way than in the final stage, e.g. a filter layer may be unprotected
for some time — causing it to be vulnerable to wave attack or high flow velocities.

The circumstances during construction have such a large influence on the workability
and the final quality of the structure that it is necessary to have at least some statistical
data of the conditions at the construction site. Frequencies of water levels, currents,
waves and wind should be available or estimated before starting. During construction or
maintenance, a good weather forecast is indispensable. Some activities are preferably
not planned during the relatively rough season. In the Netherlands, for example, the
execution of works involving sea defences is forbidden by law between October and
April. In tropical countries, monsoons can create conditions lasting months, in which
operations along a coast are risky or practically impossible.

Working in water and wind cannot be learned from a book; experience is
indispensable. One must often quickly adapt to the changing circumstances.
Improvisation should be avoided however, but that is not always possible, certainly
not in remote areas. This chapter merely sums up the most important facets of the
construction, including some of the difficulties with which hydraulic engineers may
be confronted. More information can be found in CUR, 1995, which has been an
important source for this chapter.

13.2 Equipment

13.2.1. General

Constructing bed, bank and shore protections means working at the transition area
between land and water. Hence the two main types of equipment are and based and
waterborne. The choice between these two types in a particular case depends on the


13. CONSTRUCTION 333
availability of equipment and the possibility of working from the land side or from the
water side. For a large project, any existing equipment can be mobilized and the choice
will depend chiefly on costs. For a mega-project it can even be profitable to develop
and build special equipment which is written off on that project alone. E.g for the
Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier in the Netherlands, special barges have been built
to sink the block mats for the bed protections. For the breakwaters at Hook of Holland
(Port of Rotterdam) side stone dumping vessels have been constructed and special
barges have been built to place the concrete blocks of the armour layer.

For smaller projects standard available equipment will be used. In a less developed
area where very little is available and possible, creativity (and sufficient knowledge on
hydraulic engineering!) can be crucial to arrive at workable solutions. In the following
sections, some widely used standard equipment will be mentioned.

For the application of rock, a distinction can be made between direct dumping and
controlled placement. Some equipment can only be used for dumping of large
quantities of stones while other machines are fit (or are only able) to place each stone
individually. There are, of course, various possibilities in between. This distinction
between the various types of equipment is not black and white: for each piece of
equipment the possibilities will be described.

A third distinction could be made between transportation equipment, such as trucks
or cargo barges, and handling equipment which include cranes or stone dumpers.
Combinations are also possible and sometimes the difference is not so clear. So, here
too, there is no black and white distinction and the characteristics will be mentioned
accordingly when the equipment is described.

13.2.2 Land based equipment

Most land based equipment moves on wheels or tracks. Figure 13-1 shows some
examples. Any truck can be used to carry stones, but special off-highway dump trucks
can carry loads from 30 tons up to 150 tons. They can be used for transport and for
direct dumping. Wheel (or track) loaders have typical capacities of 5 to 15 tons and
can be used for handling and loading on a construction site and for short distance
transport on a construction site.

Shovels can do more or less the same, but with longer arms, they can reach farther.
Typical capacities are 5 to 40 tons. Shovels move stones away and upwards to a
position higher than the driver, while backhoes look very much the same but “scrape”
the material upwards from a lower position towards the driver. Bulldozers, finally, only
push material forward.


334 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
f=
—
Ee _
|
= ; LAI | Jj =
Oe C=O
dump truck wheel loader bulldozer
front shovel ry backhoe nA
S ath MA
_—S
4 ri "
Bee -
WF 4 | oi Ga
—— 7 aI
if “igi 4
a ay —
. 1 4 ce
or een y b.3
ial
Figure 13-1 Some examples of land based equipment
Loaders, shovels and backhoes can lift material up to disctances of several meters, but
for larger distances cranes usually have to be used. Cranes are usually equipped with
a clamshell or a grab, see Figure 13-2. Clamshells can be used for finer material like
sand or gravel, while a grab can carry large stones, up to about 8 tons. An average
operation speed for conventional cranes is about 20 cycles per hour, while for
hydraulic cranes this can go up to 30-40 cycles per hour. The lifting capacity of a crane
depends largely on the reach, see also Figure 13-2.


13. CONSTRUCTION 335
20
e" Ltt Nt f :
z z
wt 7
| 7 Bvan | k |
BREE: Canton
fs Es ree ie earl (orange peel)
reach (m) <—— rotation centre
ia 4 e = n
ie oe ALE IOL S\
: oo Pee "
BS wan me 6 re “
' ,
p> seed As wea
Ai! o>; Ae
_ Be + o> —
ae 2? ho
gs Thin agg > s 2 ——
pee a ae see =
is 5 : =
Boise eee pa ——
Sreis 7 ff
bale ee” . i
Figure 13-2 Crane capacity and accessories
Working conditions
Land based operations in hydraulic engineering have the same limitations as working
outside on any construction site. Extra problems can be caused by wave run-up. Land
based operations should therefore be planned well above possible wave run-up during
construction or the downtime due to excessive wave run-up should be allowed for in
the planning. When a breakwater is constructed with dump trucks, the crest on which
the trucks drive is normally 1 — 1.5 m above normal (high) water levels. Generally, in
a tidal area, on low lying parts of the construction site, operations will be limited to
low water periods.
A vehicle with caterpillar tracks can drive on larger stones than one with tyres. If the
stones are too large for truck tyres, the large gaps on the surface can be filled with finer


336 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
material. This is possible for rock up weighing up to | ton. But if the fine material has
to be removed again because it has a negative influence on permeability and stability
(see Chapter 8), this becomes very costly.
13.2.3 Waterborne equipment
N
f ‘ q
— . N
A
4 = =a
Figure 13-3 Split barge
Figure 13-4 gives some examples of waterborne equipment. Starting with the idea that
the only difference between land based and waterborne equipment is that it drives
rather than floats, one can place any piece of land based equipment on a barge or
pontoon, sce (a). Placement rates will be rather low, while the placing is reasonably
well controlled. Individual stones can be placed quite accurately. A side stone dumping
vessel (b) is the appropriate tool for many situations. Stones are transported on deck
of the vessel and can be pushed into the water by hydraulically driven slides. The
loading capacity can be up to 1500 tons, while the dumping capacity is about 60 - 70
tons per minute. The dumping process can be reasonably well controlled, depending
on the velocity and the waterdepth, see section 13.3. If no side stone dumping vessel
is available, a pontoon and a bulldozer can form a substitute for a fairly uncomplicated
job.
A split barge (c) or a barge with bottom doors can be used when large quantities of
stone have to be dumped, like in the core of a breakwater or any other dam structure.
For accurate placing, the split barge is not a good alternative. When used for bottom
protections in large depths, the result can even be a crater instead of a bulge, see Figure
13-4c. This is especially the case in deep water. If accurate placing in large depths is
important, a fall-pipe vessel can be the answer (d). This is for example the case when
a pipeline has to be protected.


13. CONSTRUCTION 337
a I A cs
a —|_ ae AN
wf =a=I cI EN 1
<4 (za) = looms
Cy en Cp) oy)
® = © © |
Figure 13-4 Some examples of waterborne equipment
TE  ————— =
= | ‘
———— j ._ a
a .,
= ——— ae | iio
——— mi > wae =
SN = — >= :
= J © 4
ak: y
LID ce f J
= Ae 7p he
ee > Z
ew
2 a F
a, = pote SU)
gi A ee Shes
£7 be A. _
» Chas “eer +
=
Figure 13-5 Side stone dumping vessel (Boskalis)
Working conditions
Waterborne operations are usually more vulnerable to environmental conditions than
land based operations. Tides are an obvious example. During low water, the depth can
be insufficient for barges. On the other hand, high water can create ideal conditions
for waterborne operations. So, in any case working time versus downtime heavily
depends on the tides, which behave independent of normal working hours.
Current velocities of up to 1.5 — 2 m/s usually pose no special problems. Higher
velocities make special measures necessary, either by means of strong anchoring
possibilities or by means of engine thrust in all directions.


338 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Waves can cause many kinds of problems. Short wind waves are usually less of a
nuisance than swell. Most barges that have been designed to work in coastal waters
can operate in wind waves of up to 1 — 1.5 m, while the same barges experience
problems with swell waves of merely 0.5 m. Cranes mounted on a vessel are vulnerable
to rolling, Tilting of just a few degrees can cause downtime for such a crane.
Navigation along the construction site, finally, can cause hindrance to the operations.
With special warning or signs for the passing ships, they can be urged to slow down.
13.3 Bed protections
13.3.1 Loose rock
Constructing a loose rock bed protection can normally be done best with a side stone
dumping vessel. Such a vessel sprinkles the stones rather than dumps them. The water
depth and current velocity influence the accuracy of placing the stones. Figure 13-6
shows possible deviations.
——————
7 1c
A=
a O,
wig’ y
—>- yey h
u he
iW a \
teh
ie
x
Figure 13-6 Deviations from dumping location with side stone damping vessel
The deviation of the centre of the mound of the stones compared with the location
vertically under the ship can be estimated from the current velocity and the fall velocity
ofa stone in water. The latter can be found by equating gravity and flow resistance:
3 1 aq. 1 Bd
mg = Fy > (Ps — Pw)dnsog =C' Pytt” dns > Ural = Ga hsdnso (13.1)


13. CONSTRUCTION 339
where C’ is a constant of proportionality depending, among other things, on the shape
of the stones. The deviation, x, now can be computed simply from the tangent of the
angle between fall velocity and current velocity:

y=C (13.2)

VE Adns0

where C is a coefficient with typical values of around 0.7 — 0.8.
The path to x in Figure 13-6 is the average path and the sinking stones show random
variations around this average, leading to a width of the bulge, y. Empirically, this
width was found to be (Van Gelderen, 1999):

y=KVh (13.3)
in which K ~ 1.9 Vm for broken stone and K = 2.1 Vm for rounded stone.
Another problem with dumping can be segregation of fine and coarse material. To
prevent this, it is usually sufficient to ensure a ratio dyoo/dno < 5 — 10.
13.3.2 Fascine mattresses
Fascine mattresses (see Section 11.2.3) are preferably constructed on a slope near the
water, see Figure 13-7. In a tidal area, the construction site is usually located between
low and high water, making towing away the mattress quite easy but reducing the
possible working time. On a site completely above water, work is possible all of the
time, but a strong towboat is necessary to pull the mattress into the water. The
construction site in Figure 13-7 is too small for a complete mattress, so during
construction, part of the mat has to be towed away. The finished mattress floats and is
towed away to the place where it is wanted. A beam is connected to the mattress to
distribute the pulling forces evenly. Fascine mats are typically up to 100 m long and
16-20 m wide.
Historically, these mats were manufactured from osiers (a type of willow) which were
clamped between the so-called 'raster' or grid of bundles of twigs/branches bound
together to a circumference of 0.3 m. 'Plugs' were driven into the crossing-points of
the bundles to serve as anchor points for towing and sinking the mats (for bed
protection) or collar-pieces (for foreshore protection). Because of the destruction of
the osiers by pile-worm attack, a reed layer was incorporated into the mats. These
fascine mats were made on embankments in tidal areas or on special slipways.
Modern mats are made in accordance with the same principles. The twigs/branches
and reed are replaced by a (usually woven) geotextile into which loops are woven and
to which the gridwork of twig bundles is fixed. A reed mat may be affixed onto the


340 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
geotextile in order to prevent damage to the cloth during the discharge of stones onto
the mat. The geotextile extends out beyond the rasterwork with the aid of lath
outriggers so that, on sinking, the mats overlap. Sometimes a double gridwork is
applied to give the mats a greater rigidity and more edge support to the quarry stone
load. The mat construction can serve as a protection for the bottom, a foreshore and
even as an embankment protector. In the last case the mat is hauled up against the
embankment itself.
3 Te ERNE 4 “eS
2 = SS
So a 2
AA: ce a a potent
‘ ‘ Lig SS
Oe eS 2 oa ye
os Oe, Geer
se Oe oe
i eros on ,
a 7x, ee
tas geotextile
———_— 4 x 2 under: construction
supply of material . Senet pat eal
construction site ono,
Figure 13-7 Construction and towing away of fascine mattress
Modern alternatives to fascine mats include mats where the quarried stone is replaced
by open-stone asphalt reinforced with steel mesh, or by ‘sausages’ of cloth or gauze
filled with a ballast material such as sand, gravel, bituminous or cement-bound
mixtures.
The following is a description of a sinking method, often used in the Netherlands.
Other methods are also possible. Upon arrival at the sinking location, the mattress is
tied between two pontoons. In a tidal area, the sinking is done during the slack-water
periods between ebb and flood or vice versa. A heavy metal beam causes one end of
the mattress to sink. A side stone dumping vessel is manoeuvred between the pontoons


13. CONSTRUCTION 341
and stones are dropped on the mattress, making it sink further. These stones give the
mattress a provisional stability on the bottom (normally, light stones are used for this
first cover: 150 — 200 kg/m? of stones 10 — 60 kg). The stone dumping vessel moves
slowly with the tidal current direction, dumping over either one or both sides of the
vessel. Once the mattress is completely on the bottom, the beams are retrieved and
extra stones are dumped to finish the bed protection (depending on the size required
for the loads after construction, normally 1.5 — 2-d,so which, for stones 10 — 60 kg
comes down to around 500 kg/m?).

front pontoon Here suripet tail pontoon
= o
Bs tail beam
e
°
sinking beam
f ae eam cies =e i
Ree. a
wee P
ae. yi
PS ac ae A
& i Ne
ES 1 “A. ; P
a TAs. Mey
} Yy Se
es >
Figure 13-8 Sinking fascine mattress


342 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
~/ B LEN
ope e iby
ete eee eT CC
ry i} . “¥ ; ON me at ‘ ; “
FB ee We i aby ee ee
S 7 Fees Se nes. StS
rc. aes 2 2 Re RY y= = st =F
« no sag 5 iS. Se Say
= a 5) is 4
ae a ie
— — (a - te | ed
= A ot Ve
[= Me = - ie \
a oe ee = 1
a -_. ey = es .
Figure 13-9 Construction of bamboo mattress
13.3.3 Prefabricated mats
Prefabricated mats are transported and sunk with special equipment. For the Eastern
Scheldt storm surge barrier, the mat dimensions were 200 x 30 m2.
ee i. =>
Pee fae 1 caesar Cee o
ae, ea ct Se.
y Z—_ Wa hoe
a Sal
— 4 Ka . a
Page Sr, . eS b:
Sas a ee Vy oe
<, Aes ss SG
NYRR NIRS, | %y
VSS i ® vax RON I
eee ‘ :
peut” NN gg Zeta | ee
% , m7 [| eS re c
: : & Ny \ BX
RRS. ee <b aa . ae eee
ic. ae A 5 ——- » eee ne
pe x et
bis, PE i years #
I ‘<i
Figure 13-10 Sinking block mat in Eastern Scheldt (Rijkswaterstaat)


13. CONSTRUCTION 343
For placing prefabricated mats special equipment is needed. Such equipment is only
economical for very large projects (like the Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier and
the barrages for the Venice lagoon). Mats can be made of very strong geotextile with
steel or plastic pegs. On these pegs concrete blocks are poured.
13.4 Bank protections
13.4.1 Revetments
ih ni = |
| I | . =
Te \\ wyS
= ‘iems mii
ez | i | wali i
OP + ree | ||| i)
1 a | i a Bs
- ply mere 3 Oe KS ae
a 14 See =~ as
a= 4 _ Ss
— =
Figure 13-11 Placing geotextile in simple revetment (Johan van der Ham)
Revetment construction can be done from two sides, so both land based and
waterborne equipment can be involved. Basically, a revetment consists of a top layer
and a filter with some toe protection. The simplest version is a geotextile with stones
on top. Figure 13-11, Figure 13-12 and Figure 13-13 show some possible construction
methods. A geotextile is rolled down from the bank. To a very limited extent, this can
be done manually, if necessary with the assistance of a diver. A fascine roll tied to the
lower end can give some stiffness to ease the process. For larger structures, a pontoon
can pull a steel pipe down the slope, around which the geotextile is reeled. But this
method is only feasible when there are very calm conditions (no waves). A side stone
dumping vessel then covers the geotextile with stones, upward from the toe to prevent
the whole geotextile sliding down. However, the geotextile needs to be sufficiently
anchored at the top to prevent it from being pulled downslope during placement of the
rock. Attention needs to be paid to the strength of the geotextile for this operation.


344 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
VS dy =
Ww LW o “
Figure 13-12 Construction of a simple revetment with side stone dumping vessel
"4 ~S
" LP
f Gp
a f LL»
Ve
~ 87
A ‘ rae
F \ a AK *
aoe) Rec
. ms
oak GRD
a ee —
> ya ity
———
=
=
Figure 13-13 Placing stones with floating crane and grab (Johan van der Ham)
When a fascine mattress is applied on a bank in a tidal area, or as a toe protection for
a dike, it can be placed at high water after which it is anchored by placing stones on
top, see Figure 13-16.
‘Survivability criteria
Selection of a geotextile should include provisions to ensure that the geotextile
survives construction, its own installation as well as placement of adjacent materials.
Additionally, the contact stresses which will be exerted on the geotextile by the
adjacent materials due to compactive efforts or confining pressures are to be consider-
ed. For instance, angular drainage media (rip-rap) typically exert high contact stresses
whereas rounded material (gravel) gives moderate stresses.
An important aspect of survivability is the placing stones on the geotextile. Dropping
the stone causes an impact which may puncture the textile. Lawson (1992) found the
following relation:
H> CIF dys (13.4)


13. CONSTRUCTION 345
in which h is the drop height and C is a constant depending on the acceptable rate of
damage. The geotextile is characterised by its specific weight sin g/m?. However, this
equation has a physical problem. Damage is caused by impact energy, which is a linear
function of h and the mass of the rock. Also the coefficient C has a dimension (g/m**).
No damage means C = 1200 g/m*5, 10% damage is C = 705 g/m3*. Hall (1993)
presented an equation as function of the drop energy, developed by the German
Bundesanstalt fiir Wasserbau (BAW):

=05E ft 0<p<1000
# or # (13.5)
= E-1000 for 1000< pu <2500
E is the critical drop energy in kgm?/s (E = mgh, m is the mass of the rock). Tests of
both Berendsen (1996), marked with DWW in Figure 13-14, and Antoine ef al. (1990)
confirm this equation.
me non-damage criterion acc.
Lawson 0% (c=1200)
5 Lawson 10/60 kg
E
3
3
3 BAW 10160 kg
33 7 Lawson 30/130 kg 1 DWW60200 kg
3 7
¢ Pa © Antoine 30/130 kg
2 ate Lawson 60/300 kg 1B DWW20130 kg
iaS wen BAW 20/130 kg DW 10160 kg
1 eal
esi-=
—— as *
° 00 600 00 1000
mass of geatextle(arn2)

Figure 13-14 Relation between drop height and mass of geotextile (Berendsen, 1996)
For underwater conditions one may apply a reduction. The fall velocities, and cones-
quently the drop energy, are reduced by the water. Berendsen (1996) has developed a
method to compute this. He combined the equations for the fall velocity of rock in air
and water and after some rearrangement he came up with:

1 22
Iny = hy -———In MoT te (13.6)
2eq | ug —ue
and


346 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
o = 3 Pw Ga (13.7)
5 Ps des
in which is:
fw =waterdepth
hy = drop height of stone above water
us = maximum permissible drop velocity (from the
uo = velocity with which the stone hits the water surface
ue = equilibrium velocity of a stone in water
Cy = drag coefficient for stones (approx. 1.0)
The velocity with which the stone hits the water can be calculated with
ug = y2ghy
and the equilibrium velocity in water can be calculated with
u, = [8
4
where A= relative density of the stone (a-p»)/pr:
‘And based on the BAW criteria one can find:
Uee = im for 0<s<1000
om (13.8)
Dey = gf #100) For 1000 << 2500
m
Figure 13-15 shows the drop energy as a function of the required mass of the geo-
textile, as provided by two different companies, Naue and Geofabrics. The left graph
from Naue is based on the BAW rules, as described before. It means that for stones
with a weight of 500 kg falling from a height of 1 m in air, one has a drop energy of
500*1*9,81= 5 kNm. This means that according BAW a geotextile with a weight of
at least 3000 g/m? is needed.
It seems that these figures are rather conservative. GeoFabrics has done some tests
with their own geotextile and dropping stones of several tonnes on it. From that they
made a design graph (Figure 13-15 right). According to that graph, a block of 500 kg
dropping 1 m (drop energy 500 kgm) requires only their geotextile HPS4, which is a
nonwoven with a weight of only 137 g/m’.


13. CONSTRUCTION 347
F veste
2 100
3 sis
3 10.
2
wood
-
2
i —— .
ma ie
Nie Fanatachn Tet Gectarics
"0 600 1000 1500 2000 +~«2600 «2000 am i Fe m Tae |
Geotextio mass per unt area ig m2) a aiaiaaielatiaiitial
Figure 13-15 Relation between drop energy according to manufacturers
Placement
Above low water, a top layer of a revetment can be placed from the bank. For light
stones (up to 10 — 60 kg) this can be done with light hydraulic excavators. For heavier
stones, a heavier excavator or a crane with a grab is normally used, see Figure 13-17.


348 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
‘ .
: * 4
poe
= -
Sao
r ris =
ay? E /
. f ,
ad J ;
8 | . Se , ig :
pong bah fy Best
ais as MER SS Py ghey Me Ad
ics oie |
Ferber J |.
i if % r . “Ss
pstel ) =
iON ons a hae
Figure 13-16 Placing fascine mattress on revetment
Figure 13-17 Placing of small and large stones from landside


13. CONSTRUCTION 349
It is also possible to place prefabricated mats on a bank which has the advantage of
placing large areas in one action, Figure 13-18 shows an example. To hoist the mat
and to prevent damage, an equator is needed.
Weaw
We eB
Wm |
oN ps a
oss =
! SS — SS =
SSS) a — Se er
a
. Se
_ : Ca ——
ss aa
a
Figure 13-18 Placing of prefabricated mat on revetment (Dycel blockmat)
13.5 River groynes
For the construction of river groynes usually floating equipment is used. After a bed
protection has been made, a layer of riprap is placed. This core is later protected with
an armour layer consisting of placed blocks ore riprap. Placed blocks are most easily
placed above the water line, so this kind of work is preferably done during low river
discharges. This has to be done with land-based equipment. When a protection with
riprap is selected, it is usually done with floating equipment. Sufficient draught is
needed for the vessels, so this usually is not possible at the lowest waterlevel in the
river.


350 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
E — V
" i SS F
f
y ms = /
a [og
Figure 13-19 Construction of a river groyne (photo Rijkswaterstaat)
13.6 Shore protections
13.6.1 Dikes
Dikes consist roughly of a relatively impermeable body and a protection layer which
is quite similar to a revetment. The body can be made of clay, which has a good
resistance even after the protection layer has been removed, or of sand. In the last case,
the protection layer fulfils a much more essential function than in the first case. New
dike bodies are mostly constructed of sand nowadays, as clay is not always available
in large quantities.
By Surge level —— 2 lt
ae — a,
santa temporary hopper dredger
mounds ‘
Figure 13-20 Construction new dike body of sand
Figure 13-20 shows a way to construct a new dike. Sand is dredged from a site which
is near enough to keep the costs low and far enough to prevent morphological
consequences for the coastline. The sand is pumped either directly from a stationary
dredger or is unloaded onto a pontoon using a self-propelled hopper dredger. The sand-


13. CONSTRUCTION 351
water mixture which is released from a pipe, creates very mild slopes. Under water
1:15 — 1:25 and above water 1:30 — 1:40. This will result in a dike body which is often
too large or in much loss of material. To avoid this, small mounds of fine quarry stone,
or other available flow-resistant material are constructed to create steeper slopes. In
between these mounds the sand is sprayed and spread with bulldozers.

When the body is finished, the protection layers are installed. To protect the dike
against the daily wave and current loads during construction, the toe and under water
parts are made first e.g. by applying a fascine mattress with stone cover. After that, the
dike revetment is constructed. Depending on the type of top layer, e.g. blocks, asphalt
or grass, specialized equipment is used.
a
—
: =< a
“tl .
ie, a
=
a eens
Se
Se
ry ae
a ee eats,
—— “a
Figure 13-21 Mechanical placement of Basalton (RWS, Hans Johanson)


352 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Fy
k _& al
_—_ —
Ne th 42 i
f r - : a ‘
| i as t? = a
—
See: 7 od
see ae ae ee
ai Sie ee toe
2 —
; ee ies
LE Zt ee
e = tg 5 tem
gO ae” See
Fo ER eB at EE ow
a es err
Figure 13-22 Construction of an asphalt revetment (photo Netherlands Pavement
Consultants)
13.6.2 Groynes and breakwaters
Coastal groynes and breakwaters have several similarities, the difference lies mainly
in the dimensions. Both usually have to be constructed under exposed conditions. The
choice for land based or waterborne construction depends on many factors, but the
availability of equipment and the source of rock are probably decisive. When the
quarry is inland of the considered coast, land based operation might be the first choice
because the rock is transported with trucks, while waterborne operation is logical when
the stones are delivered by barges. When transhipment of material is necessary
anyhow, the choice depends on other factors.
The photo at the beginning of this chapter gives a good example of the various types
of equipment needed for the construction of a groyne.
Land based construction
Trucks are important tools for land based construction of groynes and breakwaters.
They can be used for direct dumping, but when a higher placement accuracy is needed,
or when the required slope cannot be achieved with direct dumping, additional cranes
will be necessary. This will take much more time when every truck has to be unloaded
on the spot. Sometimes it is possible to create a stock pile with direct dumping from
where a crane can continue to work.
Passing possibilities for trucks are important to achieve higher production rates,
especially on long structures. When a crane is working, passing can be indispensable,
see Figure 13-23 and Figure 13-24. Hydraulic excavators can be used for reaches
which are not too long. For the land based construction of a toe structure, long reach


13. CONSTRUCTION 353
cranes are necessary. For deeper water this has to be performed with waterborne
equipment.

OS
Ce TE
‘ant tap ‘ot
0.75 0.75 0.6
7.0-8.0 +____8.0-9.0__,,
Figure 13-23 Land based equipment on breakwater
poe 1
| So deal -
Ao tf Se ==)
~~ 2S . eo
age ma eee. :
* Sores \, ag ee
nt ee ee ye
ats ee ‘8
ee PA
: Wigs P's P78 “o>
Figure 13-24 Construction workfront with several cranes, requiring access by dumpers
(Van Oord)
Waterborne construction
When the breakwater becomes very long and traffic jams on the crest become a
problem or when cranes have to reach too far, the use of barges becomes an option.
For the core of a groyne or breakwater, a split barge can be very economic if large
quantities have to be dumped. For toes and armour layers, a more accurate placing is
needed and a side stone dumping vessel can be used. For large elements, a crane on a
pontoon, or a specially designed barge, is the answer.


354 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
a —
ig Put
f PA
Liat -wiee
ee
ae 84 oe y \"< - sae.
i Big, ne
ere <> . aS
ee aeunles
Sea” | esas
one :
ow ae
rotg er
Pe eee
<page Ee
Pee Coe K DY
Figure 13-25 Placing elements on a breakwater with crane ship (van Oord)

Combined land based and waterborne construction
Often a combination of the two main categories of construction equipment is used,
certainly for larger structures. Figure 13-26 shows the construction sequence of a large
breakwater. First, the bottom is protected with mattresses where large filter gradients
are expected and with gravel on other parts. On top of that, part of the core is made
with quarry run dumped from split barges. This can be done up to a few meters under
normal high water, depending on the draught of the barges and the normally occurring
wave conditions. The rest of the core is provided and dumped with trucks, while the
slopes are trimmed and part of the secondary armour layer is applied on the slopes
with a crane on a pontoon.
The toe of the breakwater is placed with the crane on the pontoon and the secondary
armour layer is completed, either with the same crane and pontoon or with a crane
which operates from the crest. The armour layer, consisting of heavy concrete blocks,
is placed with a heavy duty crane. The crown wall is cast in situ and the armour layer
is finished.


13. CONSTRUCTION 355
= ~ o
fasci a 3-6 in
ascine mattresses
—_—=— — ek
gravel
concrete cubes <crownwall
$$$ =
quarry run
eee IIE MBE ll
so Ga —f»>
Soa ee _S_
Figure 13-26 Execution scheme breakwater
13.7 Quality assurance
13.7.1. General
Quality assurance, quite normal in mechanical and electronic industries, is relatively
new in a traditional business, such as hydraulic engineering. Of course, there has
always been some kind of quality assurance implicitly incorporated in the crafts-
manship of the personnel, but it was never explicitly mentioned in contracts. More-
over, in contrast with cars or computers, the client (usually some public authority) was
always present during the construction of his product.
Two factors are changing, increasing the necessity of a quality assurance system. Firstly,
traditional methods and manual labour are being replaced by new mechanical methods
for which less experience is available. Secondly, there is a shift in the relation between
the client and the contractor. More and more "turn-key" or "design and build" contracts
or whatever name they have, are signed worldwide. In those cases, the contractor has
more responsibility to demonstrate the quality of the product to the owner. Since it is
impossible to rely only on an inspection of the final product (which is usually under
water and covered with a lot of material), good quality control and document control
systems for the whole process are essential.
Quality is defined as: the degree to which the product, process or services complies with
the functional requirements. Meeting the required quality standards is mainly a matter
of organisation rather than a technical issue. The realization of a product of sufficient
quality is the result of good control of all activities (design, materials, placement), which
concerns all parties involved (client, design engineer, suppliers, contractor). The
following activities play an important role in quality control assurance:


356 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

¢ Definition of existing needs

© Specification of functional requirements

Description of the design process and design methods

© Work preparation (materials, planned equipment and working methods)

© Construction (placement accuracy)

¢ Commissioning and testing

¢ Maintenance

e Evaluation
Quality assurance is not merely limited to the construction stage but involves all project
stages. Reversely, the design should not only take into account functional requirements,
but should also take into account practical construction requirements such as tolerances
and construction feasibility using standard or specially built equipment. During all stages
of a project, the quality should be safeguarded by a quality manager who reports
independently to the project manager.

13.7.2 Tolerances
Land based operations

Using standard equipment, the tolerances can reach the following values:

Table 13-1

“Material ‘Tolerance above water_——=—=——STolerance under water
Gavl—0.05m—s—(‘i;S!”!”!”!”!”!”!”!”~t(éWO Sm
Rock 0.25 — 0.5 dyso (min. 0.2 m) 0.25 — 0.5 dyso(min. 0.2 m)

With good supervision and manual assistance even better values can be reached. Land
based construction with materials like concrete blocks or asphalt can yield accuracies
in the order of magnitude of centimetres.

Waterborne operations

If the right equipment is used, with the individual placement of stones in relatively
shallow water, the same vertical tolerances as mentioned for land based operations
should generally be attainable. For stone dumping activities (bulk placing), Table 13-2
gives some numbers.

Table 13-2

Waterdepth Waone < 300 kg Weaone > 300 kg,

Above water £02m +04 to—0.2m

<5m +0.5 to- 0.3 m +0.8 to- 0.3 m

5-15m approximately + 0.5 m +1.2to-04m

> 15m approximately + 0.5 m +15to-0.5m


13. CONSTRUCTION 357
Vertical tolerance of dredging activities, which are often a preparation for protection
works, ranges from 0.1 to 0.5 m.
Horizontal tolerance depends on the propulsion of the equipment (bow and stern
thrusters or other propellers that can be pointed in any direction) and the navigational
equipment (c.g. based on Global Positioning System or Differential Global Positioning
System, Dynamic positioning, etc.). If waves and currents are absent or negligible, a
horizontal accuracy of approximately | m can be achieved.




Appendix A
Material properties
meee
LA 4 *
ba
_ XY
Ss ss _ a -
—_ |
aS a aa
= eo ts a aS
ieee sa ae
Droptest on a geotextile for the Venice barriers (photo by Maccaferri)


360________CINTRODUCTIONTOBED, BANKANDSHOREPROTECTION
A.1__—_ Block weight and size
Nominal diameter
In normal grain size distribution the value of ds is used. This is the median grain size.
This means that 50% of the grains are larger than dso and 50% of the grains are smaller
than dso. The value of dso is determined by sieving the sample, make a sieve curve and
read the value of dso from the sieve curve.
However, for larger rocks, this procedure is rather difficult. Sieving rock with weights
of 1000 kg and more is impossible. For such rocks a different procedure is followed.
In those cases a sample is taken (for example a full truckload) and the weight of all
individual stones is determined. From this weight distribution the Wso can be
determined (i.e. 50 % of the blocks is heavier than Wso and 50% of the blocks is lighter
than Wso.
Unfortunately is most design formulas not the weight, but the diameter is used. So a
formula is needed to change the weight into the diameter. If the shape is known, this
is no problem, but in reality the shape of the block is unknown. To avoid confusion,
internationally the nominal diameter is used. The nominal diameter is, by definition:
4{{ 50
dyso =} (“
Ps

Because most rocks have more-or-less the same shape, a relation between dso and dso
exists. This relation is:

dys = Fs * dso = 0.84 dso
Research from Laan [1981] has shown that in nearly all cases the shape factor F, is
between 0.70 and 0.90.
Some students have the impression that the “nominal” diameter is in some way related
to a certain exceedance value (e.g. it should be the value exceeded by at least 10% of
the stones). This is not the case. The size exceeded by 10% of the stones is the doo, the
weight exceeded by 10% of the stones is Woo, and of course there is also a dnvo, which
is the nominal diameter of the Woo block. The value of d,,90 is never used in practice.
Grading
Ina sample of natural quarry blocks there will be a range of block weights, and in this
sense, all rock materials is, to some extent, graded. The particle weight distribution is
most conveniently presented in a percentage lighter by weight cumulative curve, where
Ws expresses the block weight for which 50% of the total sample weight is of lighter


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 361
blocks (i.e. the median weight) and Ws and Wis are similarly defined. The overall
steepness of the curve indicates the grading width, and a popular quantitative
indication of grading width is the Wes/Wis ratio or its cube root, which is equivalent to
the dss/dis ratio determined from the cumulative curve of the equivalent cube or sieve
diameters of the sample. The following ranges are recommended for describing the
grading widths:

Table A- 1 Recommended grading widths

gradation

gradation
The term 'rip-rap' usually applies to armouring stones of wide gradation which are
generally bulk placed and used in revetments. The phrase ‘well graded’ should
generally be avoided when describing grading width. It merely implies that there are
no significant 'gaps' in material sizes over the total width of the grading.
There are many advantages in introducing standard grading classes. These mostly
concern the economics of production, selection, stockpiling and quality control from
the producer's viewpoint. With only a few specified grading classes, the producer is
encouraged to produce and stock the graded products, knowing that designers are more
likely to provide them the market by referring to these standards wherever possible.
The proposed standard gradings for armour are relatively narrow. This can result in
increased selection costs, but these will often be completely offset by the possibility
of using thinner layers to achieve the same design function. Standard gradings are not
needed for temporary dedicated quarries supplying single projects where maximised
utilisation of the blasted rock is required.

Intermezzo A-1: Two different standard deviations

When sieving stones the grading is found. From all these dso-values one can determine

This sieve curve is usually described by the the mean and standard deviation o(ds). In the

dyso and the grading dis/dis. Statistically one table below “range” gives an idea of o (d),

could also use dean and  (d). while the values in the column dhso give an

But when taking many samples from a batch idea about o(ds). In Figure A-I the small

of stones, one will find always slightly horizontal bar also gives an idea of o(dso). In

different grading curves, so every sample will _ probabilistic calculations one need usually the

lead to a certain dyso. value of o(ds0) and no to (d).
European standard EN13383 (2002) defines gradings for larger rock (armour stone).
For smaller rocks EN13242 (2008) can be used. The standard gradings are defined by
a lower sieve size (di) and an upper sieve class (dyci); Ic! means “lower class limit”
and ucl means “upper class limit”. According to EN13383 these classes are as follows:


362 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Table A- 2 Standard gradings in EN13383
Class name dso | dssidi | diso | 2) | @)
cm ps fe
CP45/125 45/125 mm 0.4-1.2 6.3-9.0 2.8 64 20 300
CP63/180 63/180 mm 1.2-3.1 9.0-12.5 | 2.8 9 20 300
CP90/250 90/250 mm 3.1-9.3 12.5-18 2.8 12.8 20 300
CP45/180 45/200 mm_ | 0.4-1.2 6.3-9.0 4.0 64 20 300
CP90/180 90/180 mm_ | 2.1-2.8 11-12 2.0 97 20 300
LMa 5-40. 5-40 kg 10-20 18-23 17 17 25 500
LMa 10-60 10-60 kg 20-35 23-28, LS 21 32 550
LMa 40-200, 40-200 kg 80-120 37-42 LS 34 52 850
LMa 60-300, 60-300 kg. 120-190 42-49 LS 38 57 950
LMa 15-300 15-300 kg. 45-135 30-44 27 31 46 700
HMa 300-1000 300-1000 kg | 450-690 65-75 14 59 88 1325
HMa 1000-3000, 1-3 ton 1700-2100 | 103-110 14 90 135 2050
HMa 3000-6000 | 3-6 ton 4200-4800 | 138-144 1.2 118 177 2700
HMa 6000-10000 | 6-10 ton 7500-8500 | 167-174 1.2 144 216 3250
CP - Course gradings (1): range of Wso for category "A" (kg)
LM- Light gradings (2): Layer thickness 1.5 diso (cm)
HM - Heavy gradings (3): Minimal dumping quantity with layer of 1.5 dso
(kg/m?)
In all classes a few smaller or bigger stones may occur (less then 5% smaller, less then
2% bigger). Apart from LMa and HMa there is also the category LMa and HMs. The
difference is that the B category does not have to fulfil the requirements for Wso. The
grading CP90/180 is a narrow grading for special application, like the use in gabions.
Note that the “Course Grading” is finer than the “Light Grading”. The reason is that in
both EN13383 and EN 13242 the same groups are defined. In EN 13242 the CP class
is the coarsest class.
Standard gradings are more or less essential for fine and light gradings. However, for
heavy gradings it is not difficult because of individual handling to define and produce
gradings other than standard (see Figure A-1). For example, if the 1-3 t grading is (just)
too small for a particular application, choice of the first safe standard grading of 3-6 t
will lead to an excessive layer thickness and weight of stone, and here use of a non-
standard grading may well be appropriate. Again, ceiling sizes of stones in quarries
arising from geological constraints may dictate an upper limit.


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 363
Sieve distribution Course Grading acc. to EN13383
400 — =
o +} SESS
oo + _| FSPaSst VT TTT
no A A es
foi UNAM oe
so -—! TTI AE TT ee
i oi TTT NTA TTT Tie
xo +} TTA A TTT je
oo +} AAR
70 |) TV INNTT
of | TTT SSSR TTT
10 100 1000
Weight distribution acc. to EN13383
0 SSS SSSA
so |_| TF INTIN OSA AND TTT TTT
¢ w+ NTN ANA TTT og
Poco} TENT WAN AAT to bo kg
so LLIN NCIS TTT) | 0 08,
40 CUTTTIN SUNT | oo S00
30 TNS [8308
ao +E NANT RAT TTT =
to LINNEA
of | UT TT NNINESS TTT
1 10 100 1000
kg
Weight distribution acc. to EN13383
9) SS SSS
pa |
$0 OCI TIN Tet orton
§ OA) aston
© co} NN Item
a OO
2 of} A MITT |6-t0 ton
2 30 COIN TAINS TTT [10-18 ton
70 TNA TT
EV CS
100 1000 10000 100000
kg
Figure A-1 Standard gradings in EN13383


364 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Three light grading classes have been defined by weight in an identical way to the
heavy gradings, as shown in the table. Corresponding requirements have been
proposed when these gradings are specified using ‘sieve! sizes and have been
designated 200/350mm, 350/550mm and 200/500mm classes. The test verification in
the latter case requires both gauging of blocks and average weight determination. Both
specifications for the light gradings are intended to produce approximately similar
graded stone products.
Stones smaller than CPasj12s are not defined in EN13383, because they cannot be
applied in hydraulic engineering works in unbounded form as armour layer. For filter
layers and for bounded material (Open Stone Asphalt, Colloidal Concrete and Polymer
Bounded Material) sometimes smaller gradings are needed. Information regarding
these gradings can be found in EN13242 (for civil engineering works and road
construction).
In EN13242 no special classes are defined, but it has been defined how classes have
to be described. An aggregate is defined by a lower and an upper limit (der and dici, in
mm). In the standards is given which percentage of the stones might be smaller than
dj-i or bigger than dye. Also limits for 0.5 dici, 1-4 duct and 2 dyci are given.
Table A-3 Standard gradings in EN13242
aggregate | size category
pee ae eee |
dic<11.2mm_| 100 | 98 to 100 | 801099 | 0020] Oto5 | Gc85/20
FEES i eb sie eada
duc 1.2mm
I eA
dic=O
Lemos [deo ™ | [emery | Te |
graded 0/8 | dia=0
ee [issace” [ion [oie jase) |_| oo |
and die=0 100__| 98 to 100 | 85 to 99 G90
The letter G means that we consider the grading quality. There are several classes:
Ge Course gradings
Gr Fine gradings
Gyo Natural graded
Ga Wide gradation
The stones are defined by their size, e.g. stones 20/40 means that the stones have a
“minimum” of dic: = 20 mm and a “maximum” of duc! = 40 mm.
GCss5/29 means that 85% of the stones smaller than d,,.; mm and 20% of the stones is
smaller than di mm. For the categories Gr, Gx and Ga only one number is given. For
example for Natural graded material 0/8 mm, Gxc90 means that 90% of the stones are


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 365
smaller than 8 mm. It means that in Gr, Gno and Ga always fine particles are allowed.
Especially for application in filter material this could be a problem.

For a grading often used in Polymer Bonded Material, e.g. Elastocoast (30/50 mm)
this leads Figure A- 2. In order to fulfil the GC85/15 requirement the real sieve curve
should be between the blue lines, in order to fulfil the GCso20 requirement the real
sieve curve should be between the green lines. The even more strict condition GC90/15
requires that the sieve curve is between the red lines.
g 1
S09
5
2 os
5 07 ‘Go 80/20
4 85/15
sii GE 90/15
os
04
03
02
Of
é 1 4¢uor 2h
10 20 30. 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
OS de) et 4)
sieve diameter (mm)
Figure A- 2 Difference in grading categories
Especially when filter properties are important (i.e. the layer should be permeable) one
should have a very narrow graded mixture. This means that in those cases a GC90/15
is to be preferred over a GC80/20. However, one should realise that the first one is
usually more expensive.
The grading envelopes become progressively narrower in the ‘heavy grading’ classes,
consistent with design requirements and the geological constraints on producing large
sizes of blocks. However, projects requiring blocks larger than 10 t should not make
the (non-standard) grading class excessively narrow because of the producer's extreme
difficulty in selecting accurately and the wastage from oversize block production. For
example at p,= 2.7 t/m’, d, for a 15 t block = 1.7 m, and d, for a 20 t block = 1.95 m,
a difference of about 10%, which is very difficult to select precisely except by
individual weighing.


366 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
A.2 Geotextiles?
Geotextiles are permeable textiles made from artificial fibres used in conjunction with
soil or rocks as an integral part of a man-made project. They are frequently employed
as filter membranes and as the interface between differently graded layers. Geotextiles
are also used as bed protection and can be loaded with concrete blocks (block
mattress), bituminous bound crushed stone and sand (Fixtone mattress) and geotextile
tubes filled with gravel (gravel-sausage mattress). Gravel bags have also been used for
special filter requirements.
The basic functions of geotextiles may be listed as follows:

Separation: the geotextile separates layers of different grain size;

¢ Filtration: the geotextile retains the soil particles while allowing water to pass

through;
¢ Reinforcement: the geotextile increases the stability of the soil body;
¢ Fluid transmission: the geotextile functions as a drain because it has a higher
water-transporting capacity than the surrounding materials.

Geotextile manufacture
Geotextiles are manufactured from a variety of artificial polymers:
1. Polyamide (PA);
2, Polyester (PETP);
3. Polyethylene (or Polyethene) (low-density LDPE and high-density HDPE);
4. Polypropylene (PP);
5. Polyvinylchloride (PVC);
6. Chlorinated polyethylene (CPE).
The first four are the most widely used although many variations are possible.
Additives are also employed in geotextile manufacture to minimise ageing, to
introduce colour and as anti-oxidants and uv stabilisers.
Comparisons of properties of the four main polymer families are shown in Table A-4.
These are very broad, because there are many variants within each group. Some
properties (such as strength) are also greatly influenced by the different processes of
manufacture. A classification of geotextiles based on the type of production and the
form of the basic elements is given in Figure A- 3.
The basic elements used in geotextiles are monofilaments, multifilaments, tapes,
weaving film and stable fibres. Monofilaments are single, thick, generally circular
cross-sectioned threads with a diameter ranging from 0.1 mm up to a few millimetres.
Multifilaments (yarns) are composed of a bundle of very thin threads. Yarns are also
obtained from strips and from wide films. Tapes are flat, very long plastic strips
between | and 15 mm wide with a thickness of 20-80 um. A weaving film is sometimes
used for the warp 'threads' in a fabric.
* partly based on the Rock Manual (C1r1A, 2007)


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 367
Table A-4 Comparative properties of general polymer families
ee Gaal polyamide] polypropylene | polyethylen
:
Elastic Modus
GV. | Subiled
light _[Unstabilised
Alkali
Ea
ze
Lit] Looe] fentane] [atin
Ex =
.
= | [== [= ]
Figure A- 3 Geotextile classification groups
The basic fibre is a fibre of length and fineness suitable for conversion into yams or
non-woven geotextiles. For non-woven fabrics the length is usually about 60 mm.
Woven geotextiles
A woven fabric is a flat structure of at least two sets of threads. The sets are woven
together, one referred to as the warp, running in a lengthwise direction, and the other,
the weft, running across. Woven geotextiles can be categorised by the type of thread
from which the fabric is manufactured.
Monofilament fabrics are used for gauzes of meshes, which offer relatively small
resistance to through-flow. The mesh size must obviously be adapted to the grain size


368 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

of the material to be retained. Monofilament fabrics are made principally from HDPE
and PP.

Tape fabrics are made from very long strips of usually stretched HDPE or PP film,
which are laid untwisted and flat in the fabric. They are laid closely together, and as a
result there are only limited openings in the fabric.

Split-film fabrics are made from mostly fibrillated yarns of PP or HDPE. The size of
the openings in the fabric depends on the thickness and form of the cross-section of
the yams and on the fabric construction. These split-film fabrics are generally heavy.
Tape and split-film fabrics are often called slit-films.

Multifilament fabrics are often described as cloth, because they tend to have a textile
appearance and are twisted or untwisted multifilament yams. The fabrics are usually
made from PA or from PETP.

Besides the above-mentioned monofilament fabrics, special mesh-type constructions
are produced such as those with a monofilament warp and a multifilament weft which
have outstanding water-permeability and sand-retention properties. Other examples
include open meshes in which the woven or unwoven warp and weft threads are
attached at crossing points by chemical or thermal bonding and other meshes
constructed by using knitting techniques.

Non-woven geotextiles

A non-woven geotextile is a textile structure produced by bonding or interlocking of
staple fibres, either monofilaments or multifilaments arranged at random, accom-
plished by mechanical, chemical, thermal or solvent means. Non-woven gauzes are
structures with large meshes which are formed by placing threads or tapes at
predetermined distances on top of one another and bonding them at the intersections
by a chemical, thermal or mechanical process.

Geotextile-related products

These products are distinguished in one-dimensional (strips, ties), two-dimensional
(grids, nets, webs) and three-dimensional (mats) products. Grids are lattices made from
perforated and then stretched polymer sheets. Three-dimensional mats are produced
by extruding monofilaments into a rotating profile roller, followed by coating so that
the threads adhere to each other at crossings which are spatially arranged. The matting
material itself occupies less then 10% of the mat volume. The mats are 5-25 mm thick
and about 1-6 m wide.

Characteristics and properties

The geotextile properties stem primarily from their functional requirements. Since the
geotextile can have a variety of functions, requirements are diverse. For reinforcement
the emphasis is on mechanical properties such as E-modulus and strength, for filters it


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 369
is on properties such as water permeability and soil tightness. The durability required
will depend on the specific application and lifetime required. Geotextiles must also
fulfil secondary functional requirements related to the execution of the work (e.g. a
certain amount of uv-resistance is needed) or it must have resistance to mechanical
wear and tear if construction equipment is to be driven over the fabric. The suitability
of a geotextile should be checked against these functional requirements during the
design phase of the project.

Although specification requirement tests need only be carried out once, the following
quality control tests may be required during production: tearing strength, grab test
strength, tensile strength, strain at breaking load, moduli and mass distribution. These
tests should be made in both the length and width directions. The thickness, the mass
per unit area and the bursting strength may also need to be checked, and in some
applications water permeability and sand-retaining properties will be important. A
large number of national and a few international standard test methods are available
covering these requirements.

Dimensions

The maximum standard width available for both woven and non-woven fabrics is 5-
5.5 m. The length is limited by the available transport facilities and ease of handling
on-site. Depending on the mass per unit area, the length generally lies in the range 50-
200 m.

Jointing is necessary to obtain greater dimensions. In practice, large areas can be
covered by overlapping sheets. Where physical continuity is required without overlap
then heat welding (some non-wovens) or stitching may be used. The seam forms the
weakest link in the geotextile construction and should therefore be checked thoroughly
against the specifications. The thickness of most geotextiles lies between 0.2 and
10mm when unloaded, although this may sometimes reduce under pressure.

In general, the mass of non-woven geotextiles lies in the range 100-1000 g/m?, 100-
300 g/m? being the most commonly used. Woven fabrics can be heavier and masses
between 100 and 2000 g/m? are possible. The greater demand is for the lighter grades
in the range 100-200 g/m?. Generally, the lighter types of geotextiles are used as
separators, the heavier woven fabrics for reinforcement and the heavier non-wovens
for fluid transmission.

Mechanical properties

The mechanical properties of geotextiles depend on a number of factors: temperature,
atmospheric conditions, the stress-strain history, the mechanical properties of the
material and fibre structure, the structures of the yam and of the geotextile, the
direction of anisotropy, and the rate of loading and ageing. Most fabrics exhibit cross-
contraction under loading. However, light tape fabrics and fabrics with so-called
'straight' warp construction do not exhibit cross-contraction and construction strain


370 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

(strain due to fibre straightening). Test methods can be categorised into those that do
not prevent cross-contraction (uniaxial) and those that do (biaxial). Methods
commonly employed for tensile testing are strip tensile, grab tensile, manchet tensile,
plain-strain tensile, wide width tensile and biaxial.

A great variation in both strength and stiffness exists, The strength varies generally
between 10 and 250 KN/m. Non-woven and woven PP fabrics are not ideal in situations
where high strength is combined with low strain because of the large elasticity of these
geotextiles.

All meltspun synthetic polymers, as used in geotextiles, have visco-elastic behaviour,
which means that the mechanical behaviour is time-dependent. This becomes manifest
in creep and relaxation phenomena. Creep data for polymer materials can be presented
in several ways. Often log ¢ (strain) is plotted against log t (time) for various levels of
the ultimate short-term load U, i.e. 50% U, 25% U, etc. The sensitivity to creep of
polymers increases considerably in the sequence PETP, PA, PP and PE. For geotextiles
that are loaded for prolonged periods of time (10-100 years) the permissible load for
polyester is the order of 50% of the tensile strength, for polyamide 40%, and for
polypropylene and polyethylene below 25%.

Burst and puncture strength of geotextiles is important in coastal and shoreline rock
structures, In these tests a circular piece of geotextile is clamped between two rings
and loaded directly by gas or water pressure or by a physical object, Puncture tests can
be used for investigating the resistance of a geotextile to puncturing by, for instance,
falling stones. The other tests available include the California Bearing Ratio (CBR)
plunger tests, the cone drop test and the rammer test (BAW). Test methods are also
available for strength parameters such as tear strength, abrasion resistance and friction
coefficient.

Chemical properties

One of the characteristic features of synthetic polymers is their relative insensitivity to
the action of a great number of chemicals and environmental effects. Nonetheless, each
plastic has a number of weaknesses which must be taken into account in the design
and application. Specifically, the lire of geotextiles can be affected by oxidation and
by some types of soil/water/air pollution. Many synthetic polymers are sensitive to
oxidation. The end result of oxidation is that mechanical properties such as strength,
elasticity and strain absorption capacity deteriorate and the geotextile eventually
becomes brittle and cracks.

Investigations have shown that, provided the geotextile is not loaded above a certain
percentage of the instantaneous breaking strength, the thermo-oxidative resistance will
determine the theoretical life of the material. The allowable load for PETP is, at most,
50%, for polyamides it is somewhat lower, and for polypropylene and polyethylene it


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 371
is about 10-30%. (This only applies where the geotextile functions as a filter and is not
withstanding mechanical loads).

Specific additives have been developed to counteract these processes. These can be
grouped according to their protection function as either anti-oxidants or UV-stabili-
sers. In fact, the thermo-oxidative resistance of a geotextile is determined by a number
of factors: the thermo-oxidative resistance of the polymer itself, the composition of the
anti-oxidant packet, the effect of the thermo-oxidative catalytic compounds in the
environment, the effects of processing on the long-term thermo-oxidative resistance,
the resistance of the anti-oxidant additives to leaching by water and the practical site
conditions.
A.3. Gabions
A gabion is a box or mattress-shaped container made out of hexagonal (or sometimes
square) steel wire mesh strengthened by selvedges of heavier wire, and in some cases
by mesh diaphragms which divide it into compartments (see Figure A-4). Assembled
gabions are wired together in position and filled with quarried stone or coarse shingle
to form a retaining or anti-erosion structure. The wire diameter varies but is typically
2-3 mm. The wire is usually galvanised or PVC-coated. PVC-coated wire should be
used for marine applications and for polluted conditions. In case of PVC-coated
gabions rounded stones should be used to prevent cutting of the PVC protection by
stone edges.
Gabion Mattress
vs
bs
bo seal Diaphragms
side panet
-

. ri
ae <= ZO.

\ . en Sey

. ¥a >

ie Sate Diaphragm
Figure A-4 Gabions

The durability of gabions depends on the chemical quality of the water and the pre-
sence of waterborne attrition agents. The influence of the pH on the loss of the galvanic
zinc protection is small for pH values in the range 6-12 and there are examples of
gabions with negligible loss over 15 years. However, from an environmental point of
view this leaching is sometimes unacceptable. Grouting of the stone-filled gabions or
mattresses can give some protection to the wire mesh against abrasion and corrosion,
but this depends on the type of grout and the amount used.


372 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

The dimensions of gabions vary, but typically range in length from 2 to 4 m (mattress,
6m), with widths about 1 m (mattress, 2m), and height 0.3-1.0 m (mattress, max. 0.3
m). The mesh size is typically 50-100 mm.

The units are flexible and conform to changes in the ground surface due to settlement.
Prefabricated gabions can be placed under water. Gabions can thus be used in a wide
variety of marine works: groynes, dune and cliff protection, protection of pipelines and
cables, and as toe protection. Mattress-shaped gabions are flexible and are therefore
able to follow bed profiles both initially and after any scouring which may take place.
Gabions can also be piled up to the form retaining walls or revetments. In order to
prevent migration of solid through the structure they may be used in conjunction with
geotextile filter layers.

In certain applications the gabion structure needs impermeability or weight to counter
uplift. To give these characteristics, the stone is grouted with mastic or a cement-bound
grouting. The weight of the structure can also be influenced by the choice of the density
of the stone blocks with which the gabion or gabion-mattress is filled.

It is also possible to use full synthetic gabions. They are usually made from relatively
stiff polypropylene grids The strength of this material is in the same order of magnitude
as steel (40 kN/m). However, because the flexibility of a synthetic gabion is larger than
a steel one, the stability relations need to be adjusted somewhat. For details is referred
to Oosthoek (2008).

A.4 Physical properties of soil®

The soil characeristics which affect vegetation establishment and growth, their princi-
pal determinants and the ways in which they can be modified are given in Table A-S.
Soil contains water, air, fine earth, stones and organic matter.

Rooting potential indicates the resistance of the soil to root penetration, which depends
mainly on the soil's bulk density and on mechanical strength. Roots have great
difficulty penetrating soil with strengths greater than 2.0 to 2.5 MN/m2, though higher
limiting values have been suggested for coarse-textured soils. Generally, root growth
is enhanced by greater moisture content and voids, and is retarded by higher bulk
density and clay content. Critical dry bulk densities for soils, above which root growth
is severely restricted, are about 1.4 mg/m? for clay soils and 1.7 mg/m* for sandy soils.
As clay content is so important in determining the rooting potential, a term packing
density (La) is often used to determine the maximum density to which a soil can be
compacted and still permit root growth (see Figure A-5).

3 Based on Coppin and Richards, 1990


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 373
Table A- 5 Soil physical parameters (definitions related to plant growth)
Parameter Definition Assessment
Soil Texture Description based on proportions by _ Field estimate or laboratory
weight of sand, silt and clay as measurement
percentages of fine earth fraction <
2mm in size
Sioniness, % Proportion of large particles, > 2mm Direct measurement or field
vol estimation
Dry bulk ‘Apparent density of soil in situ(ona Field measurement, either
density (ton/m’) dry basis) removal of undisturbed core or
replacement method (sand or
water)
Particle density Density of the soil particles Laboratory measurement by dis-
(ton/m’) placement. Most soils are
consistent with the value of
about 2650 kg/m’,
Void ratio (€) Ratio: volume of soil voids to e= (pp) pp
volume of solids.
Porosity (n) Volume of soil voids expressed asa__n= I-pilp,
(total pore part of total in situ soil volume
space) (note: voids occupied by air and
water)
Soil erodibility — The risk of erosion by air or water Direct measurement or
factor due to the nature of the soil itself estimation based on soil texture
Packing density A more reliable indicator of the La= ps + (0.009 x % clay)
(La) (rooting effects of compaction than bulk
potential) density alone; allows for clay
content
[nat determina
particle | packing | poro- | organic | vegetat- | topo- | culti- Jcompact-Jadditions| time
size | density | sity | matter [ion cover| graphy | vation | _ion
[ewe [et [ft ft ft ft ft ft ft
Times fe [ele] | felel fel
Jovinenoonia] @ |e fete | | felel | |
soil water
| ms |e | fete] | | [elel |
permeability and @ @ | ®
lwater acceptance|
Ton exchange
[so | * | | [ete| | [el [el
coaty [oe | [etelefefete| | |
easy of
Lone [*[efe] | fe] [ele] |
Figure A-5 Soil physical characteristics
Soil texture describes the particle size distribution and gives an indication of the likely
behaviour of a soil in respect of handling, root growth or drainage. Descriptions such


374 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
as sandy loam or clay are based on measured proportions and mixtures of clay, silt and
sand in the fine earth <2 mm) fraction, as shown in Figure A-6.
100 7 .
— wel graded / Bi
t0--| gates” f zs
+++ + tp graded f :
7° pope
a fs
* a i
a
2 £ y
° tt
001 om mo o oo 2 6 2 8 » w 2
Panicle size ditibuton (gracing) (rm)
fire | medium | coarse | fine | meduim | coerse | ne | medhm | coarse
clay traction cobbios
sit racton sand ation revel Faction
fe ath stones
Figure A-6 Sieve curve with examples of different grading
The proportions of sand, silt and clay can be obtained from the particle grading curve
(Figure A-6), calculating the quantity of each size fraction as a percentage of the
<2mm fraction. This results in triangular diagram (Figure A- 7). In this figure the
definitions of BS5930 are used. In the Netherlands a similar diagram is defined in
NENS5104. Note that the transitions from clay to silt, from silt to sand and from sand
to gravel/cobbles may vary from country to country. This results in different triangles.
ve Ss SR we wr
ssa
RSS
Soe .
‘ . & Sopnsomens
5 Ses
i %, Fy
& 4 ia, on
‘ “% ? ‘
id Xe V7 %.
er . ft > . a \ 2 ,.)>
SEIN 5) 7 xe” *
Figure A- 7 Soil triangle according to BS5930 (left) and NEN5104 (right)
Soil structure is a characteristic which describes the arrangement and size of particle
aggregates or 'peds'. Structure develops over time, as fine soil particles aggregate into
crumbs and blocks. This increases the number of large pore spaces and thus the
permeability and rooting potential of the soil. The presence of organic matter and plant


APPENDIX A. MATERIAL PROPERTIES 375
roots plays a major role in developing and maintaining soil structure. Structure is easily
damaged by handling or cultivation during wet conditions, when the soil is weaker.
Soil potential
The physical, water and chemical characteristics of the soil can be combined into an
overall assessment of soil potential for plant growth. A scheme for this is given in
Table A-6. In the table class A is the highest quality for situations where good quality
and fertile topsoil is necessary. However, class C, whilst of poorer quality, would still
be suitable for many situations. In many cases it would be possible to modify or
manage a class B or C soil to improve quality.

Table A-6 Assessment of soil potential
[parameter unit unsuitable
i ee ee
boise dt dT
clay% SZL ZL | ZCL, LS |SC, ZC, $
lpacking density 1.4-1.75)
pH 5.7-7.0 | 5,2-5.5 | 4.7-5.5 <47
rr ee eee
[Teondueiviy | mmborom | <4 | 48 [810 | >10 |
OO
boipraiiy + TY
fot nivogen | Yoweight | <02 | 005-02 | <0s [|_|
fot phosphonis | mg | >37_| 2737 |_<a7_f ‘|
fot posh | mak | >360| 180-360 | 180 [|
pvailable phosphons—[meke [520 [1420 [<a [|
lvailablepotasium |__| tas | ao-iss [<0 P|
f= fine, S = sand, C= clay, L = Loam, Z = Silt
Selection of soil materials
The simple system for assessing soil potential described in Table A-6 can be used as a
general guide to classify all material which the engineer intends to use as soil,
regardless of origin, according to its potential for plant growth. Classes are allocated
as follows:
Soil type
Class A Highest growth potential, important when it is necessary for soil to have
minimal restrictions on plant growth. Suitable for final soil covering or
topsoil.
Class B Where growth potential is not critical, but reasonable growth is still
required. Also suitable for subsoil layers beneath Class A.


376 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Class C Will still support good growth if managed properly, but susceptible to
handling problems which may restrict growth. Can also be used as subsoil
layers.
Suitability cannot be based on soil texture alone and the classes proposed in Table A-
6 have therefore only general application.
Soil fertility
Class A Highly fertile, will produce dense vigorous growth, requiring higher
maintenance and leading more quickly to successional changes. This is
neither always necessary nor desirable, however, and the group is best
used for intensively managed areas and for grazing.
Class B Moderate fertility; fertilisers may be required to support very produc-
tive growth.
Class C Minimal fertility, suitable for low-maintenance vegetation but ferti-
lisers will be necessary. Swards should have good legume component.
Soil physical properties and fertility are defined separately so that different classes can
be selected for each, depending on the situation.


Appendix B
Examples
=
> ee —
a
Long groyne at Eiijerland (example B3, photo Rijkswaterstaat)


378 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
In this appendix, three cases are described. These cases are meant to give an idea of a
preliminary design. They are necessarily simplifications of situations from practice.
Boundary conditions are taken as realistic as possible. The reader should be aware that
designing is not a mathematical science. There is always more than one solution and
even the magnitude of the various parameters in the formulas is often ambiguous.
The message is that these examples should not be taken for granted, but they give an
idea of how practical design problems can be met in a feasibility study. In many cases
for projects of some importance and/or dimensions, this preliminary phase is followed
by detailed computations.
B.1._—_ Bank protection along a river mouth
Introduction
‘The waterfront of a town, located on the bank of a river mouth, is subjected to erosion.
The ground level of the town is high enough to prevent flooding, but the erosion is
threatening the road along the waterfront, see Figure B-1.
7 —_—Ss
N —_,
TOWN WA SEA
4 \
MM ERODING BANK t oe cd \
KS, , \
RIVER ¥ / ! A > ca
f wt
Le | oe 7
i =a 4
1 May
Cr
i HANNE
a] CROSS SECTION B - B
—-- MSL+4m
MSL 10m_
Figure B-1 Overview of the situation
‘The average depth of the river at the eroding location is about 5 m below MSL, but
near the town, in the outer bend, it is 10 m. The erosion process does not appear to stop


‘APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 379
and is shifting the main channel continuously to the south. The main channel is 500 m
wide at MSL.
Waves enter the area from sector A. Their height is limited by a shallow area in the
river mouth, which lies approximately 0.5 m above MSL. The river bed and banks
consist of sand with a diameter of 300 um.
The following table gives the boundary conditions for this case.
Table B-1 Boundary conditions
frequency (MSL + m) H,(m) T, (8) flow velocity
(I/year) during tidal
cycle (Q/A in
m/s)
Average HW 1.0
Average LW -1.0 Ls
1 2.0 0.75 4 2.0
0.1 2.5 1.0 5 2.5
0.01 3.0 1.25 6 3.0
0.001 3.5 Ls 7 3.5
Note:

- The waves are correlated with the extreme waterlevels (a high waterlevel is
also caused by the wind).

- The velocities are given as the discharge divided by the area (Q/A) and are not
correlated with the high waterlevels (the location is very close to the sea and a
high river discharge or high tidal range is independent of the average waterlevel
at sea). In a tidal cycle these velocities occur around MSL.

Design frequency

There is no danger of flooding, the bank protection can easily be inspected and repaired
and damage of the road will not lead to great danger of the buildings at the other side
of the road immediately. With inspection every year and an accepted chance of
exceedance of 10%, this leads to a design frequency of 0.l/year. Hence, design
conditions are: water level MSL + 2.5 m in combination with waves: Hs = 1 m, T)=5
s and, separately, w= 2.5 m/s.

Choice of protection type

There are several ways to protect the river bank against erosion, e.g. by means of
groynes or with a revetment from rock. At first we will make a rough comparison
between these two.

For the lay out of groynes, see Section 2.6. To keep the main flow from the bank, the
groyne should have a length of at least 1/5" of the distance between the groynes. A
distance of 250 m and a groyne length of 50 m is used. For the slopes of the groyne
1:2 is chosen (rather steep to save material). The crests of the groynes are equal to the


380 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
waterlevel of the design flood to prevent high velocities directly along the bank. The
slope of the (unprotected) bank between the groynes is assumed 1:3.
For the dimensions of a revetment, we need the width and the thickness. The width is
determined by the slope. An important parameter for the slope of the revetment is the
possible seepage. Due to rainfall and/or to fluctuating waterlevels in the river, seepage
is almost always present. In that case, section 5.4.2 simply gives: a< #2. From Figure
3-7 we find for sand with dso = 0.3 mm: 4 ~ 30° (river sand is rather rounded). From
this we find: a< 15°, which means a slope of | : 3.5. The thickness depends on the
diameter which still has to be determined. For now we make a safe estimate: 0.5 m
thick. See figure B-2 for the lay-out of the groyne.
ee
50
tala GROYNE
=
‘ 7) nS 50
REVETMENT (ey ~S> ~
1:35
Figure B-2 Lay-out of the groyne and revetment

Its difficult to compare all aspects of the two solutions, groynes and revetment. Costs
and construction method, for example, heavily depend on local circumstances.
Therefore, the comparison is made, simply based on quantities of material. The design
waterdepth is 10 + 2.5 m. For the groyne, the volume of stone for 250 m bank length
(one groyne for 250 m bank) is: A+ B + C= 1/2 x 1/2 12.5 x 50 x 37.5 + 1/2 x 12.5
x 50 x 50 +1 x 25? x 12.5 / 6 = 5860 + 15625 + 4090 = 25575 m’. For the revetment,
the volume of stone per 250 m bank length then becomes: 12.5 x V(1? + 3.52) x 250
0.5 = 5690 m>.
Groynes need over 4 times more stone (the volume of stone is quadratic with the depth
for groynes and linear for revetment, so only in shallow water groynes will need less
stone), but we neglect now the material to make the slope for the revetment 1:3.5 and
the extra protection at the toe of the revetment to withstand continuing erosion. On the
other hand bottom protection at the head of the groyne will be necessary and it can be
expected that the construction costs also will be higher for groynes. Moreover, we will
see that wave attack is an important load on this bank, so between the groynes an
additional protection will be needed. So, the choice is for a revetment (groynes are e.g.
applied in a shallow river when a navigation channel with a certain depth is wanted).


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 381
Top layer
The river bank is attacked both by flow and by waves. To start with the flow, we need
the design velocity near the bank. The values from the boundary conditions can not be
used directly, since they represent an average in the cross section (Q/A). Since the bank
is located in an outer bend of the river, the velocity will be higher than this average.
Fora first estimate we take 40% higher, leading to a design velocity of 1.4 x 2.5 = 3.5
m/s (measurements are, of course, preferable and not so difficult to obtain!). We
further assume that this velocity occurs at the toe of the slope (see Section 3.3), so, the
water depth is about 10 m (maximum velocity occurs in the tidal cycle around MSL,
see note with boundary condition table).
From the Shields equation, with y= 0.03 and A = 1.65, we find iteratively with C =
18 log(12h/kr) and k= 2dhso — diso = 12/(C2 yA) = 0.1 m. This is however for uniform
flow and with a horizontal bed. The flow in a river is more turbulent than in a uniform
flow, due to variations in cross section and the stones lie ona slope of 1:3.5. To take
this into account we apply two correction factors.
K, takes the extra load due to turbulence into account and is assumed 1.2, which is a
rather conservative estimate. K, takes the decreased strength into account and is
calculated with:
Ka= \(1 ~sin®a/sin’g). For a= 16° and g = 40° this leads to Kx = 0.9. then becomes:
K,2dhso-shictd/Ka= 0.16 m (Ky is an amplification factor for the velocity, hence K,? is
used for the diameter; K. is defined as a correction factor for the diameter). When dso
is 16 cm, Mso is 11 kg. From the curves in Appendix A we conclude that stone 5-40
kg is sufficient.
For the wave attack, we will use the Van der Meer formula (Van der Meer is preferred
since the permeability of a revetment is quite different from that in a breakwater, for
which Hudson was derived).
With H,= 1 m, cot a = 3.5, P = 0.1 (relatively short waves hardly penetrate into the
subsoil, hence it is considered impermeable"), T;, = 0.85%7) = 4.25, $= 2 (threshold
of damage, since the chosen boundary conditions already have a rather high probability
of exceedance: 10%) and N = 7000 (maximum value, for the same reason), we find: &
= 1.5, while for the transition between the two van der Meer formulae & = 2.2, so we
are dealing with the formula for plunging breakers. With A = 1.65 this leads to a dso
= 0.38 m, or Mso = 145 kg. From the curves in Appendix A we find that this comes
down to rock 60 - 300 kg.
It is obvious that the wave attack is dominating. The wave attack, however, does not
act on the whole slope. The region of wave attack lies approximately 2H; around the
waterlevel. For the final design we also have to take into account lower waterlevels
(with lower wave heights). A practical measure (also for construction) is then that we
apply 60 -300 kg from Mean Low Water (MSL - 1 m) up to MSL + design waterlevel


382 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
+ wave run-up (see equation 7.15 in Section 7.4.2) = MSL + 2.5 + 1.5 Hs = MSL +
2.5+1.35*MSL+4m.
Depending on the height of the bank, a practical transition to what lies above has to be
made. In this case we deal with a city waterfront with a road along the river, so, one
can think of a wall of masonry. Below the low waterlevel, the attack on the slope comes
from the flow only. So, down to the bottom, the stone 5-40 kg can be applied.
Filter
Between the stone revetment and the original bank material, a filter will be necessary
because of the turbulent flow, but most of all because of the wave-action. In that case
the geometrical rules should be followed:
disr <5 * dese

From appendix A we find for the small particles of the top layer (dso + 0.38 m, stone
of 60 - 300 kg): dise = 0.3 m. The large particles of the second layer (dssa) should be
larger than 0.06 m. In that case, the smaller particles of the second layer will have a
size of around 3 cm. This is still too large to lay on top of the original material (0.3
mm). So, more layers in between are necessary, leading to several filter layers. In that
case, a geotextile can offer a good solution. From the table in section 6.3.2 on
geotextiles we find that the maximum opening in the textile (Ooo) should be smaller
than 2db9 of the base material, leading to a value of about 0.8 mm.
The following is a practical solution:
Take a geotextile along the whole slope, together with a layer of the stones 10-60 kg.
If these are not too sharp, they can act as a weight for the geotextile, without damaging
the textile. In the zone of wave attack, the rock 60 - 300 kg is applied.
Scour and toe
As was already mentioned in the introduction, the erosion process of the outer bend of
the main channel continues, so at the toe of the slope, scouring also will go on. Since
the shift southward is now blocked, the erosion will cause deepening of the bed at the
toe. With morphological computations, the course of this process in the years to come
can be estimated. Several measures are possible to deal with this problem (see Chapter
11):

excavate down to the expected scour depth and continue the revetment

apply a falling apron

continue the revetment on the bottom of the river, assuming that the geotextile

and the stones on top of it are able to sink along with the erosion process
(hanging apron).

Both the falling apron and hanging apron will require regular inspection, e.g. every
year or after a high discharge or extreme tide. The third solution has been chosen here


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 383
and Figure B-3 shows the "final preliminary" design. This is only a rough sketch
without any detail. These can vary, depending on the construction method.

A MSL 4m
60-300 kg, 0.7 m
= ~------—-- MSL-1m
10-60 kg, 0.4m
GEOTEXTILE *
MSL- 10m =
Figure B-3 Final design of the revetment
B.2. Caisson closure
Introduction
A tidal basin is to be closed off from the sea, see Figure B-4. The closure will be done with
caissons on a sill. The mouth of the basin, where the closure is going to take place, is 100 m
wide and 10 m deep. The bed of the estuary consists of loosely packed sand with a diameter
of 0.25 mm.
The site is located in a country with summer and winter periods. During winter,
activities have to be interrupted, due to the weather conditions. The closure cannot be
completed in one summer season with the available equipment. At first, the bottom is
protected against scour by means of mattresses. Then, a sill (blocking 25% of the cross
section) is constructed as a foundation for the caissons (Phase 1). These activities are
done during the summer season of the first year. The next summer, two (closed)
abutments are constructed, blocking another 25% (50% in total, Phase 2). After that, a
caisson, provided with sluice gates, is placed to finish the closure. These sluice gates
are opened immediately after the caisson has been positioned. The purpose of these
gates is to reduce the head differences over the caisson until it is fully ballasted and
stabilized and, in this case most of all, to be able to adjust the waterlevel inside the
estuary before it is closed. After placing this final caisson and opening the sluice gates,
the total blockage is 60% of the original cross-section (Phase 3). The situation with
only the sill in the channel lasts for 250 days. The situation with two abutments takes
about 30 days and the phase with the final caisson placed, about 10 days. This
represents a very rough schematization of the closing procedure. For a real closure,
more phases are usually taken into account, but this schematization is good enough for
demonstration purposes.


384 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
abutments:
na ys Thee TT 7
Ls
dam original
Scr a
cross-section A-A
f
i
top view MSL.
; MR orn tod
B B
nee La
bed protection |
L} !
cross-section B-B
A
Figure B-4 Situation sketch of the closure
Boundary conditions
The most important boundary conditions here are the tidal levels and current velocities.
Of course, for stability of the caissons during transport from the building location to
the dam area and during the closure operation, wave data are important, but these
aspects are not considered here.
~ waterlevels inside estuary
CoN 0% dlosed (= level outside)
Za \ —— 10%clbosed
/ 7 \ =.=. 50% closed
1 7 \YS 90% lowed
lf Te
lif he
lt # \ , .
a 1 7
Vs \ H; Of
Increasing phase shit \ “ // A
and head difference \" \ /y i: e.
\ \. i
\ Be
we ff
/
an 7
VN
NS
Figure B-5 Waterlevel variations for various phases of the closure
When a tidal basin is closed, the tide in the basin gradually decreases. Figure B-5
shows what happens to the waterlevel inside the estuary. When the estuary is still
completely open, the waterlevels at both sides of the line of the closure dam are
practically the same. When the closure dam is under construction, the resistance of the


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 385
dam leads to a head difference across the dam with a phase shift and a lowering of the
tide inside. This can be calculated with a relatively simple tidal calculation. In the first
phases of the closure, the combination of head difference and phase shift is such, that
there is hardly any lowering of the tide inside. Figure B-6 shows roughly the relation
between the decrease of the maximum discharge during a tidal cycle and the
diminishing cross section of the tidal channel. When the channel is already half closed,
one sees that the discharge is still 90 % intact. This means that the velocity is almost
twice as high as in the original situation and this goes together with the head difference
across the dam.

The relation sketched above is in principle found in principle with all tidal closures.
The determination of discharges, waterlevels and velocities is done nowadays with
numerical tidal models. In this example we will use schematized boundary conditions.
The relation of Figure B-6 is used and the discharge is supposed to be a sinus as a
function of time. For all situations, the velocities now can be calculated with the help
of the continuity equation.

g 100.

2

2

0 0

5

i HEN

Hy 40

5

a 20

sil abutments caisson
: {
oO 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 60 90 100
percentage closed

Figure B-6 Waterlevel variations for various phases of the closure
For scour computations, average springtide conditions will be used, as they are
assumed to be representative for the process during closure. The maximum discharge
during a normal spring tide cycle in the original situation (no closure dam) is 1600
m?/s (figure obtained from measurements), while the cross-sectional area ~ 100 x 10
= 1000 m? (waterlevel fluctuations neglected). This leads to a maximum velocity in a
cycle during a normal springtide, averaged over the cross-section, of 1.6 m/s. With
this, the velocity in all phases can be calculated from the continuity equation.
For the stability of the sill, a discharge with a frequency of 0.I/year is used (accepted
probability of exceedance in the critical period of about one month of 1%). This
discharge is 15% higher than during normal springtide (from measurements). For
stability, more extreme conditions are chosen than for scour. Scour is a morphological


386 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
process where the time dimension plays a role, while the stability of the sill depends
on one extreme condition.

® s . m 2 ra \

z Ca eee j \. =

£0 4 Ke abies =? f A Atmans

rc LA A

> 48 SS 3 y ip é

“i 1 | | 1 “4 er
Time (hr) Time (hr)
Figure B-7 Velocities at the end of the protection (a) and under the caisson (b)

The velocities to be used in the scour computations, at the end of the bed protection,
are presented in Figure B-7a. They have been calculated, simply applying the conti-
nuity equation:

When the sill is constructed, the discharge has still about the same value as in the
situation without sill, see Figure B-6. The cross-sectional area at the end of the apron
is the same as in the centre-line of the closure dam; hence the maximum velocity during
anormal springtide is also 1.6 m/s. After construction of the abutments (50 % closure),
the discharges are about 90 - 95 % of the original values, leading to a velocity at the
end of the apron of about 1.5 m/s. The same procedure leads to 1.4 m/s after placing
the caisson (60 % closure, giving a little less than 90 % of the original discharges).
The velocities used for the stability of the top layer of the sill, under the caisson are
given in Figure B-7b. The procedure is essentially the same as for the velocities at the
end of the bed protection, but now the cross-sectional area is no longer constant.
Furthermore, the velocities are determined for a 15 % stronger tide than normal
springtide.
After construction of the sill, 25 % of the original cross-section is closed, while the
tidal discharges are still practically the same. In the narrowest cross-section this leads
to a velocity of: 1.6 x 1.15  1/0.75 = 2.45 m/s on top of the sill. After completion of
the abutments (50 % closure), this becomes: 1.5 x 1.15  1/0.5 = 3.45 m/s and after
placing the caisson (60 % closure): 1.4 x 1.15 x 1/0.5 = 3.45 m/s in the narrowest gap
of the closure dam (the apertures of the caisson).

Top layer sill

Figure B-7b gives the design velocities for the three construction stages. With the sill,
the velocities are a little less than 2.5 m/s, while the whole width of the channel is still
available for the flow. After construction of the abutments, the velocity increases up
to almost 3.5 m/s, see Figure B-7b, while about 30% of the width is blocked, leading
to flow separation in the gap giving an extra load on the sill. The velocities after placing


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 387
of the caisson mount up to 4 m/s, but this is inside the caisson. The sill itself is now
protected by the caisson bottom. So, for the stability of the top layer of the sill, the
situation with abutments is normative.

r/o
\ !
Figure B-8 Effect of abutments
From the Shields formula with u = 3.45 m/s, A = 1.65, y = 0.03 and k = 2x dyso and a
waterdepth of 7.5 m above the sill, we iteratively find: dso = 0.11 m. This is true for
uniform flow, so we have to make a correction for the flow separation in the gap. From
section 3.4.3 (Table 3.1) we find for a constriction with a vertical board a Ky-value of
1.7, when using the average velocity in the gap (which is the case here). This leads to
dyso = 1.7°Xdys0.shieids = 0.32 m. This means rock of 60 - 300 kg, as we can see from the
curves in Appendix A.
Top layer bottom protection
Behind the sill the flow spreads again over the whole width and depth of the gap,
leading to lower velocities. The stones directly beyond the sill are in an unfavourable
position, because of the vertical step, see Figure 3.13. With a sill height of 25% of the
depth and Equation (3.16), a K,-value of 1.33 is found. But there is still also the
horizontal constriction, which causes an amplification of the load. It must be said that
this combination of vertical and horizontal constriction is complicated and for an
important closure work, investigation in a scale model or a 3D mathematical model
will be necessary. Here it is assumed that, applied to the average velocity beyond the
sill, the total K,, including the effects of both constrictions, simply is the product of
the two coefficients: 1.7<1.33 = 2.3. The average velocity beyond the sill, is 50% of
the value on top of the sill, hence 3.45/2 = 1.75 m/s. With a waterdepth of 10 m, we
find d,so.shiet’s = 0.015 m and with K, = 2.3 — dyso = 2.3°x0.015 = 0.08 m. This means
much smaller stones than on the sill and the question rises again whether the procedure
followed is correct. The answer can be either to do model tests or use larger stones,
e.g. 10-60 kg near the sill. Further downstream, smaller stones can be applied, since
the flow spreads and the intensity of the turbulence becomes much lower. At the end
of the bed protection, gravel with a diameter of a few centimetres will probably
enough.


388 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Filter in sill
The top layer of the sill will be made of rock 60 - 300 kg with a dso of 0.38 m, while
the original bed consists of sand with dsp = 0.25 mm. When these large stones are
dumped on the sand, the flow through the sill will erode the bed, caused by a large
velocity on the sill and/or a large head difference across the sill. This results in
settlement of sill and caissons.
The maximum load will occur when the caisson is placed and the gates of the open
caisson are closed. The level inside the estuary will be constant, while the tide at sea
goes up and down. The head difference across the dam causes porous flow in the sill
and a filter will be needed to prevent the sand to be washed away. This filter can be
designed with the classical, geometric filter rules, but this would lead to a conservative
design, since such a filter could theoretically stand any head difference. Therefore we
apply hydraulic criteria, see Section 6.2.3. The porous flow is parallel to the interface,
so we use Equation (6.2).
At first we have to decide on the design head difference. The situation with the closed
caisson lasts only a few days (directly after placement of the final caisson, the dam is
covered with sand), so the period to consider in the determining of the probability is
very short, say 4 days. This phase in the closure however is very critical, so a very low
probability is taken, say 0.1%. This leads to a design frequency of 1/4000 days or
O.l/year. A design head difference of 2 m is found for that situation (from
measurements). With a caisson width of 10 m, we take a hydraulic gradient of 20% as
a first estimate (the seepage length through the sill is somewhat longer, but the gradient
at the inflow and outflow points under the caissons will be higher than the average
value).
Next, we have to determine the critical shear velocity from the Shields-curve (Figure
3.2). With the viscosity » = 10°, A = 1.65 and d= 0.25 mm we find iteratively: wc =
0.013 m/s and y = 0.04. Now, with Equation (6.2), J. = 0.2 and the porosity of the filter
material ne = 0.4, we find (nexdise/dsos) = 8 and from there disr = 0.005 mm.
Assuming déo/dis = 1.5 this leads to dsor = 0.008 m or fine gravel as a first layer on top
of the sand.
From this layer we go on with the same equation, now using 0.008 as dsop. This leads
to a second layer with a dso of about 0.12 m, hence coarse gravel, small rock or slag
material. Applying this rule for the third time we find that this material will be stable
under the top layer of 60 - 300 kg.
0.75m fos
_— ae
0.5m Fine gravel “ (Min.) 0.5 m Slag
Figure B-9 Cross-section of the sill


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 389
Figure B-9 shows the final build up of the sill, taking into account the height of the sill
(2.5 m), the minimum thickness of the various layers, the price of the materials and
the height until which they can be built stably in the flow (check with Shields). It seems
practical to use the slag both for the sill and the bottom protection. The construction
scheme then will be:
1 dump fine gravel under the sill area
2 dump slag over the whole bottom area
3 dump rock 60 - 300 kg to complete the sill
One should pay attention to make the top of the sill as flat as possible for the placing
and foundation of the caissons. Of course, the bottom protection can include a
geotextile, making the fine gravel superfluous. The question is, whether this is
economical in this case.
Scour
To get an idea of the scour during closure, we make some calculations using equation
4.10. For the parameters in this equation, we take: A = 1.65, ho = 10 m and uc =
Cxuel\g = 97x0.013/N9.81 = 0.4 m/s (with C= 18log(12«10/2*0.00025) = 97Vm/s).
@ is determined from model tests for a closure of some dimensions. We will make a
first estimate for arin the three building phases. For the length of the bottom protection
we take 10 x ho = 100 m at each side of the axis of the dam. (In fact the scour
calculations serve to determine the length of the bottom protection, but in order to
calculate the scour, a length has to be assumed. 10 x ho is a reasonable value to start
with).
———
a iia
J \S™M +---- >
cross section sill
top view sill
~>==— Fl ca s —
4---- —--- > ee _-_->
= M H
se===1 { s —---- Ww
top view abutments top view abutments
S stagnant flow zone
scour
| intensity M_ mixing layer
Figure B-10 Expected scour
Figure B-10 shows flow lines for the various building stages. In phase | there is only
a vertical constriction of 25% in the form of the sill. The flow separation after the sill
spreads down to the bottom long before the end of the bottom protection.


390 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Horizontally, the flow covers the whole width of the channel. Figure 4.14 indicates a
value of a = 2 for this case. In phase 2 there is a horizontal constriction of 25% in
combination with the sill. Now the flow separates in the horizontal constriction and is
still not fully spread at the end of the bottom protection. A rough guess from the same
figures leads to @ = 4 for that phase (for the deepest scour holes in the vortex streets
between the main flow and the stagnant zone). In the third phase, the total constriction
is more, but the caisson gives a better spreading of the flow than in the case with only
the abutment caissons. Here we take a = 3.
In combination with the velocities from the boundary conditions, we now have all the
necessary parameters to compute the scour depth as a function of time. But first we
have to use equation 4.14 to compute a tidal average of the scouring process. For phase
1 this is shown in Figure B-11.
6
5 if 7
4 L \ i sug?
bar’
"5s / r
me
Ea | \ average of (au - Ug)! 7
1
Et etic vot
3 0
Sy
velocity at edge of apron
2
0 2 4 meine? 10 12
Figure B-11 Relevant scouring parameter
First, au - uc is determined for every half hour, raised to the power 1.7 and the average
is calculated over the whole tidal range. This results in a value of 1.42 for phase 1. This
is the value to be used in Equation (6.4) to replace (au — u.)!7. This calculation has to
be carried out for ebb and flood flow separately. (In Figure B-10 only one side of the
scour is drawn; here both sides are identical, because of the sinusoidal shape of the
velocity curves, but for real tides they will be different. Moreover, the variation in
depth during the tide is neglected here).
We want to use days for the time, while in Equation (6.4), ¢ is in hours, so we have to
multiply ¢ with 24 in the formula. For each phase, the scour depth as a function of time
is calculated, see Figure B-12.


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 391
20
— sill Ee |
18 — Abutments sae
= Caisson =
= =
§ “a
$ PA
g') a HX 1
oO
co) 50 100 160 200 260
Time (days)
Figure B-12 Scour calculation
The total scour can be determined from these curves as follows:
The phase with the sill lasts 250 days; after that the scour depth is a little more than 5
m. Then the phase with the abutments starts, beginning with the scour from the
previous phase and lasting 25 days. In that period the hole deepens 3 m. The phase
with the caisson finally, scours less than phase 2 and lasts only 10 days. There is hardly
any extra scour. So, the final depth is about 8 m.
The question is now whether the bottom protection of 100 m at each side of the dam
axis is long enough. In the introduction it was said that the sand is loosely packed. This
means that the danger of flow slides exists, with very gentle slopes afterwards (order
of magnitude 1:15). With a slope of the scour hole itself of 1:2, this would mean that
the flow slide could damage the sill (8x15 > 100 + 8%2). The damage could be
prevented by lengthening the protection or by dumping slag or gravel on the slope of
the scour hole adjacent to the apron. After phase 1, a hole of 5 m is expected and there
seems to be more than enough time to cover the slope before the caissons are placed.
After 200 days most of the scour depth due to the sill is already reached, see Figure B-
12, so the most critical parts of the scour hole should be covered in 50 days, which
seems a realistic possibility.
H 100m
-t-———_+
Lape 2\ | 8
!
Figure B-13 Dimensions of the bed protection
This can, however, become a disappointment. In these calculations we have neglected
the sediment transport in the tidal channel. Sediment transport reduces the scour depth,
so, one could expect the above mentioned calculations to be pessimistic, but the


392 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
opposite is true. Reduction due to sediment transport is only effective when the eroding
power is relatively weak; hence, in the situation with only a sill. After that the scour
will reach more or less the same values, but now in a much shorter time. This is
demonstrated below.
The sediment transport is assumed to be: S = 3 m*/day/m (from some sediment trans-
port formula or measurements). The effect of this transport is a reduction of the scour
depth. We can calculate this reduction with Equation (4.16) through (4.18). To do so,
we have to make assumptions for the slopes of the scour hole. Here we take 4 and 40
for ; and 2 respectively. Equation (6.13) then becomes: /ism red = V(22 x hsm unred” —
Sx/V22, with ¢ in days. With this we can make calculations for the reduced scour
depths for the three phases, see Figure B-14.
20
— Sill
— Abutments
~~~ Caisson -
E : ‘ ; aa
= 15. —:> Imaginary part of reduction equation =
€ me
o og
E ail
2 —
i 10 og
3 25 oe
3 erg
(4 — ates
ie) } ae + + +
is} 50 100 150 200 250
Time (days)
Figure B-14 Scour with sediment supply
The result is hardly any scour due to the sill (less than 1 m), while the final scour depth
is almost the same as in the case where the reduction was neglected. The scouring in
phase 2 is so violent that reduction hardly plays a role. This means that covering of the
slopes of the scour hole cannot start until the abutments are completed (before the
scour reaches values of about 5m, covering is of little use). But then, there are only a
few days available to execute the covering job, so now there is more danger of the
scour holes to collapse than without scour reduction! If one is afraid of the bottom
protection being too short, the only solution is to make it a little longer.


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 393
B.3. Breakwater
Introduction
On a sandy coast, a 500 m long breakwater will be constructed to influence the
longshore sediment transport, see Figure B-15. The crest will be made at MSL + 3m
with a width of 5 m, for reasons of accessibility for maintenance and fishing. The
subsoil consists entirely of sand of 200 um, which is densely packed.
‘The manager of this coastline makes yearly inspections and does not want there to be
too much maintenance, so the design will be made for circumstances with an
exceedance frequency of 0.01/year.
/ oot
gi pee
( 2 MSE
\ \ ASE
) nog
ot oN oe
a--- spew oS
-=-->\ ery
/ PML
aoH5 ( Pe
Bf oe
Lo 3 Z ! “ 7 oe
e. / y
4 /
1f-—- MSL- 4m
y/, MSL+3m
WSL-4m
500m
Figure B-15 Situation at the coast
Boundary conditions
In Table B-2 and Figure B-16, the most important boundary conditions are presented.
‘The waterlevels come from observations and extrapolation.
The wave height is calculated as follows: the location where the breakwater is going
to be constructed, is sheltered from the prevailing winds by shallow areas with a depth
of about MSL - 2.5m. In the future, due to morphological changes, a lowering to MSL
- 3m is possible. Wave heights under extreme conditions will therefore be depth-
limited and are estimated from: H, = 0.5 x (3 + waterlevel).


394 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
Table B-2 Boundary conditions
Exceedance Waierlevel Wave height Wave period
frequency (MSL + m) Hy 1
(year) (m) (s)
‘Average HW 0.8
Average LW -0.9
1 2.05 2.52 11.3
0.5 2.25 2.62 11.5
0.2 2.45 2.72 11.7
0.1 2.65 2.82 12.0
0.05 2.85 2.92 12.2
0.02 3.05 3.02 12.4
0.01 3.25 3.12 12.6
0.005 3.45 3.22 12.8
0.002 3.60 3.30 12.9
0.001 3.75 3.38 13.0
5 18
E
r=4
5 4 4
2 Waterlevel
2 a
g 3. Wave height (Hg) ee EC)
eoces woveenre =
Fr - eg eee ) 2
q 2 sae Pr &
Bop
aa n
0 10
1 01 0.01 0.001
Frequency (1/year)
Figure B-16 Boundary conditions
The wave periods come from observation in deep water, The assumption is that the
peak period of the wave spectrum is not changed by the shallows. This is on the safe
side, since the shallow areas will generate higher harmonics in the waves, decreasing
T, somewhat, while a longer period is here unfavourable in the stability calculations.
Under average conditions, the waves are not depth limited. So, for the construction
period, wave data are necessary. It appears that, during the summer season (in which
the breakwater will be constructed), 20% of the time waves are higher than Hs = 1 m
with 7, ~ 5 s occur; 10% of the time H, > 1.5 m with 7, ~ 6 s and 1% of the time H, >
2m with T)~ 8s.


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 395
Top layer - cross-section
At first, the slope of the breakwater trunk will be determined. The gentler the slope,
the smaller the stone that is needed for stability in waves, but the larger the total
quantity of stones. Figure B-17 shows the result for a dam with a 5 m wide crest at
MSL + 3m and a bottom depth of MSL - 4m. The stability was calculated with the Van
der Meer formula for 0.01/year conditions. From a slope of 1:1.5 and 1:2, there is a
transition between surging and plunging breakers, hence the same calculated diameter.
In general, the decrease of the diameter will not compensate the larger area: the price
per ton for these stones will not differ very much. In this case, we also assume there is
also no significant difference in the price of placing the stones. A slope of 1:2 is chosen
although 1:1.5 is cheaper. This is a preliminary design which should not be made too
sharp for a first estimate of costs.
00 —= 1
~—_
400 eed os
—
~~
< =
~~ 06 g
8 3
© 200 ona 04
100 02
0 0
1 2 3 4 5
cot « (-)
Figure B-17 The effect of the slope
Warning:
The conclusion: "the steeper the cheaper" can change completely in other countries,
when rock of a certain diameter, or the equipment to place it, is not available in the
area. In that case the available diameter or equipment determines the slope. Another
reason to avoid larger stones can be when the equipment to place the stones has its
limitations.
Top layer - stone diameter
To calculate the necessary diameter of the stones in the top layer of the breakwater,
the formula of van der Meer is used for conditions with a frequency of 0.01/year. From
the boundary conditions we find: waterlevel = MSL + 3.25 m, Hs = 3.12 m and 7, =
12.6 s. In the Van der Meer formula, the period is not 7, but Tm, so a correction is
made: T», ¥ 0.857) = 10.7 s.
Other parameters in the formula are:


396 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
© P (notional permeability); for a breakwater with a permeable core a value of
0.5 is recommended,
* A (relative density): use is made of basalt with p = 3000 kg/m*, With seawater
density = 1020 kg/m’, this leads to A = 1.95.
* S (damage): some damage from the design waves is allowed, but removal of
the top layer should be avoided, so a value of 4 is used.
¢ N (number of waves): the maximum number is used (N = 7000) since storms
in the area can last for several days.
From all this we find: ¢, = 3.79, while the transition between the formulae for plunging
and surging waves is given by Equation (8.12): &, = 3.54, so we have to use the
equation for surging breakers (8.1 1b), leading to diso = 0.98 m. A reduction factor can
be applied, since the waterlevel is higher than the crest level of the breakwater. This
reduction factor is approximately 0.8 (see Verhagen ef al, 2009), leading to dyso = 0.78
m.
Now, however, the question arises whether this wave condition is dominant, since the
breakwater crest is under water and with lower waterlevels and waves, the reduction
can not be applied, possibly leading to larger stones. Figure B-18 shows the result for
all waterlevel and wave conditions. It appears that up to a frequency of 0.05/year, there
is no reduction, while for more extreme values, the crest disappears under water
leading to the maximum reduction. So, the 0.05/year conditions are dominating leading
to a dys = 0.91 m. From the curves in appendix A, we find that this equivalent with
rock 1000-3000 kg.
12
4:
= 08 . —— =
E dngoreduced
8 06
o
oa
0.2
0
10 1 01 00 0.001
frequency (1/year)
Figure B-18 Reduction for low crests
Toe
For support of the rocks at the toe, a berm is recommended (otherwise, stones at the
toe will easily move under wave attack). Because the waterdepth is relatively large,
the stones might be relatively small (H/Ad), should be between 5 and 7, leading to a


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 397
necessary drso of around 0.25 m). However, the stones of a berm should not be less
than one class lower than the top layer in order to provide sufficient side support, hence
with 1000-3000 kg as a top layer, the berm should be made of at least 300-1000 kg.
For practical reasons, in order to avoid all different kinds of stones, we will use the
same stones as those in the top layer (1000-3000 kg).

Head

The head of the breakwater is attacked more heavily by the waves than the trunk. To
account for this effect, there are two possibilities: a gentler slope or a larger stone.
Again, a steep slope is cheaper, provided the stone weight does not become prohibitive,
but means an extra class of stone. Here for the head, rock of 3000-6000 kg will be used
instead of 1000-3000 kg.

Core

Filter rules

The main function of the breakwater is to interrupt the sediment transport locally.
Therefore, finer material inside the dam is necessary, since rocks with a diameter of
around | m will cause much turbulence inside the dam, making the sandtightness
questionable. Another reason to use finer material can be that it is cheaper (when there
is a large difference in diameter); on the other hand it is more complicated to build the
dam from different materials, leading to more actions.

Applying geometrical filter rules (dynamic loading!), we find from the curves in
appendix A for the 1000-3000 kg rock a dis of 0.7 m. For stability, this leads to a
minimum dss for the next layer of 0.14 m corresponding with stones of 80/200 mm as
an absolute minimum. For the construction and friction between the layers a somewhat
larger stone would be preferable, leading to 10-60 kg.

However, the final choice for the cross-sectional build-up of the breakwater will be
made after the construction of the breakwater is considered.

Construction

The stability of the core material in the construction phase should be considered, since
too many losses of dam material will cost a lot of time and money. In the section on
boundary conditions it was said that waves of | to 1.5 mcan occur during construction.
Figure B-19 shows the damage number in the Van der Meer formula as a function of
the wave height. In order to calculate S, the van der Meer formula was rewritten in the
shape: S'= {(HP,N, ... etc.). For the number of waves N = 2000 was taken and Tn = 6
s (a summer storm of 3 - 4 hours). A damage number of 25 already indicates
considerable flattening of the slopes.


398 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
° /
7 /
20 /
8 1080kg /
5 0 A
e fe
. a |
- 60-300 kg
Fe fs etl
o os 1 1s 2
Wave height Hs (m)
Figure B-19 Damage curves for various stone sizes
From this result we can see that the core material is only stable at very small wave
heights and that even rock of 10-60 kg is easily damaged with wave heights between
1 and 1.5 m. Therefore, 60-300 kg will be used on top of a core of stones of 80-200
mm. The dumping of the core material will be followed immediately by the second
layer. After that it seems possible to leave the dam for some weeks before constructing
the top layer.
Bottom protection
Width
The functions of the bed protection are mainly:
- to keep scour holes away from the dam
- to make a transition between the large rocks of the top layer and the sandy
bottom (filter)
Dam head
Bed protection
Scour 1:2 ae
hole J 138 6m
36m
Figure B-20 Width of the bed protection
For the first function, the bed protection should be wider than the dam itself. Scour can
come from tidal currents or rip currents and is not easy to determine. A first rough
estimate can be made, by considering the dam as a blunt abutment, leading to a scour
depth of about 1.5 times the waterdepth. Maximum flow duc to the tides usually occurs
around MSL, giving a scour hole of 6 m deep. With an assumed slope of 1:2 and an
end slope after possible sliding (densely packed sand), the protection should be at least
24 m from the toe of the dam.


APPENDIX B. EXAMPLES 399
Top layer
The second function can be fulfilled by making a geotextile, reinforced with a fascine
mattress and covered with stones. These stones are necessary to keep the mattress on
the bottom before it is covered with the final structure. In the final stage, the top layer
of the bottom protection should withstand the loads, in particular the wave shear and
the tidal flow around the head.
The necessary stone size can be calculated from the modified Shields curve by Sleath,
see Figure 8.6. To calculate the shear stress, we use the linear wave theory with the
approach of Jonsson, see Table 7.1 and Figure 7.7. For 0.01/year conditions we find:
Almax = 1.75 x 3.12 m ~ 5.6 m (maximum wave in a wave train of 1000 waves with
Rayleigh distribution), 7) = 12.6 s and h = 4 + 3.25 = 7.25 m. From linear wave theory
a wave length of 103 m in this waterdepth is found, with a bottom velocity of 3 m/s
and a particle displacement of 6.15 m. Iteratively it is found that as/kr = 9.55 (with kr
= 2d,s0), ¢/= 0.073 (in Equation (7.3)) and dyso= 0.32 m (with y = 0.056 in Figure 8.6).
This means that rock of 60-300 kg is needed as a top layer on the bottom protection.
Final dimensions
Figure B-21 shows the "final preliminary" design. The various layers get a thickness
of about 2d. This results in 1.9 m for the 1000-3000 kg rock and 0.75 m for the 60-300
kg rock. The top layer on the beach is made of stones 80-200 mm penetrated with asfalt
in order to make crossing with cars possible.
A
Cross section B - B AB
A
B 8
Top view
A
HB stone + asphatt HEBD rock 60-300 kg Compete AA ees
EBB rock 1-3ton GE stone 80-200 mm bt eee
GE rock 3-6t0n ©] bed protection
Figure B-21 Final preliminary design
At the head, the rock 3000-6000 kg is constructed as a homogeneous layer and acts as
an additional protection of this head.
Note:


400 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

It will be clear that there is still a lot to be optimized and investigated before the final
design can be constructed. Details like the transition between the beach and the dam
need attention. The construction method itself has to be worked out. An average HW-
level of MSL + 0.8 m, a LW-level of MSL - 0.9 mand a bed level of MSL - 4 m make
both land-based and water-borne operations necessary. The core will be dumped by
barges and completed with land-based equipment during the low water periods of the
tidal cycle. The second layer of stones 60-300 kg will be constructed with land-based
equipment in the same manner. The top layer can be made completely above high
water level.


Appendix C
Physical modelling
Introduction
The most applied tool to obtain knowledge on bed, bank and shore protection is
physical modelling. In this note some fundamentals of physical modelling are
described.
The fundamental condition to be satisfied in a model test is that the model must behave
in a manner similar to the real scale, often referred to as the “prototype”. Similitude of
the model to prototype can be required in three general categories: geometric (shape),
kinematic (velocities), and dynamic (forces) similitude. Complete dynamic similarity
is seldom possible, because of the varied nature of the many forces acting in the
prototype. Depending on the predominant forces for which the dynamic similarity is
to be maintained, several laws of similitude can be derived.
Scaling of hydrodynamics
In hydraulic model tests concerning waves or other large gradients in the water surface
elevation, the viscosity and surface tension of water usually do not play significant
roles, leaving inertia and gravitational forces as the governing forces. The scaling law
for such situation is the Froude Law, where the Froude number in model (subscript m)
and prototype (subscript p) should be equal:
Um Up
7 * Fe Cl
V9mlm VIp Lp
Where w is velocity, g the gravitational acceleration, and L a length (e.g. water depth).
Next a geometrical scale factor is introduced, often simply referred to as the scale
factor, which indicates how much smaller the model is than reality:
L,
:
ny = 7— .
LET C2
Typically models are undistorted, such that all length scales (height, width, etc.) should
be scaled according to this constant scale factor. When introducing this relation in the
above equation of equality of the Froude number, and assuming a scale of g of 1 (both


402 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
model and prototype are on earth, so z= gp/gm= 1), one finds that the scale for velocity
is:

ny =—2 = vm C3

Um

This means that if the model is 100 times smaller than reality, velocies in the model
will be 10 times lower. As time = length / velocity, this scaling law also dictates that
the scales for the time should be equal to the square root of the length scale. One can
easily see that this relation leads to correct scaling of the wave steepness. As the wave
length varies with wave period (unit: time) squared, the steepness (ratio of the height
and length of a wave) will be scaled correctly. Using these relations, the scale factor
for many other quantities can be obtained by substituting the know length scale ny and
time scale Vnz in the unit of any quantity that has to be Froude scaled. For instance,
the acceleration with unit length / (time)? has a scale factor of n/n? = ni/(Vn)? = 1.
More resulting scales can be found in the following table.

Table C-1 Typical scales of quantities according to Froude scaling
[Variable [Unit Froude Scale |
|
Note that in the table the force and pressure include the density scale. This strictly does
not follow from the Froude law, as this does not contain the unit mass. For the
background on this the reader is referred to Hughes (1993).

Scaling of rock/concrete units
For the scaling of armour units the differences in stone density and water density
between the prototype and the model should be considered. In the case of a slope
protection under wave attack, the stability number (Hs/Ad) should be the same in
prototype and model.

H, H,

Indy = Bydy C4
mm peep


APPENDIX C. PHYSICAL MODELLING 403
Where H is the wave height, A= p,/py, — 1 is the relative submerged density, d the
armour diameter, p, the density of the stones, and py the density of the water.
For the scaling of rock bed protection against flow, a similar condition based on a
Izbash or Shields like number is considered.
tm? ty cs
Am9mtm  ApGpdty ,
where uw is the flow velocity. Both these equations lead to the following scaling rule
for the armour unit or rock diameter:
ny
ng = 2h
aa, C6
where na = Ap/Am. So when the rock materials and fluids have the same density, the
diameter scales according to the geometrical length scale. However, often the relative
submerged density is different in model and prototype, for example because fresh
water is used in the model, or the rock material is somewhat different. In such a case
the diameter of the material can be altered somewhat in order to obtain the right
stability of the material.
Reynolds number
The scaling of the forces (and stability) according to the Froude scaling only applies
for turbulent flows where the forces on objects are mainly governed by stagnation
pressures, and not by viscous (shear) stresses. Hence the Reynolds number should
typically be large enough. A general Reynolds number is defined as:
uL
Re=— C7
Vv
Where v is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid (roughly 10° m2/s for water). In this
definition still many choices for u and L are possible.
For bed protections the flow around the grains should be turbulent in order to have
well scaled forces on (and stability of) the bed protection. This gives the same
requirement as having a hydraulically rough bed friction Here the following Reynolds
number should apply:
ud
Re, = T >500 C8


404 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

Where u, = i /9/C is the shear velocity, d the diameter of the stones, ii the depth-

averaged velocity, and C the Chézy coefficient. This is the same point where the

Shields curve (Figure 3-3) starts to be horizontal. As an exercise the reader can fill in

the limit for initiation of motion of the Shields parameter that one wants to scale, and

work out the smallest model rock size for which correct scaling of initiation of motion
is still obtained, which would be roughly 1 cm.

For breakwaters the velocity near the stones is difficult to estimate, but it is linked to

/gH,, where H, is the significant wave height (the potential energy of the water within

the wave crest xpgH, turns into kinetic energy pu" around the free surface, so 1? «

gH,). Moreover, not only the velocities around the armour stones should be high
enough to warrant turbulent flow, but also the velocities deeper in the permeable core
have to be high enough to have turbulent flow. Otherwise, if the flow in the model core
becomes laminar, the flow resistance becomes higher (see the Forchheimer equation).

This means that the structure is less permeable, and we know — for instance from the

Van der Meer equation — that this leads to more damage. So when the Reynolds

number for flow in the core is too low, a scale effect will be that too much damage is

measured. For standard permeable structures the following minimum Reynolds
number has been found for which the stability of breakwater armour can be modelled

correctly (Hughes 1993):

Rey = VIE M50. 9 498 cs
v

This typically leads to model armour sizes of roughly 4 cm diameter for which no scale

effects in armour damage are present.

More useful references are given in the reference list below.

References

De Vries, M., Waterloopkundig Onderzoek, Lecture Notes, Delft University of Technology.

Frostick, L.E., McLellan, S.J., & Mercer, T.G. (2011), Users Guide to Physical Modelling and
Experimentation: Experience of the HYDRALAB Network, CRC Press, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Hughes, S.A. (1993), Physical Models and Laboratory Techniques in Coastal Engineering, World
Scientific, Singapore.


List of symbols
Basic units: kg, m,s, €
Other units: = N =kg-m/s? Pa=N/m*>
J=kg-m W=i/s
Symbol Definition Unit
a wave amplitude (=H/2) m
a wave amplitude at bottom m
A area m
Ac area of canal’s cross section m®
A area of ship’s cross section m?
b width of canal, jet or mixing layer m
B width of ship, vegetation or (half) width of outflow in plane jet m
c 1. concentration kg/m*
2. coefficient in Sellmeyer’s piping formula -
3. cohesion Nim?
4. wave celerity m/s
5. stiffness coefficient soil (with wave impacts) Pa/m
of friction coefficient (between flow and wall) -
c Chezy coefficient m/s
Ce. Canopy density (fraction of area covered by canopy) -
Op drag coefficient -
a lift coefficient -
Coreep coefficient in piping formulas -
d 1. grain diameter m
2. layer thickness m
3. propeller diameter m
dn nominal grain diameter (= V"°) m
duso median nominal diameter (= (mso/a,)!") m
d grain diameter where x % of the grain mass has a smaller diameter. m
ds dimensionless grain diameter -
D 1. diameter of cylinder m
2. protrusion abutment m
3. height of sill or dam m
4. thickness of soil layer m
5. draught ship m
6. diameter ship’s propeller
7. energy loss in bore J/sm?
8. damage in risk calculation €


406 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
e thickness geotextile m
void ratio (e = (pps) /ps) -
E elasticity protection layer Pa
Drop energy of a block kNm
f 1. friction coefficient (between materials) -
2. wave frequency (=1/T) l/s
F 1. stability factor in slip circle computations -
2. fetch m
Fy flow force Nim}
g acceleration of gravity m/s?
h waterdepth m
ho original waterdepth m
he dam height relative to bottom , dike crest above still water level m
I tree height in a mangrove forest m
hy scour depth m
Nise equilibrium scour depth m
Ii waterdepth above toe of breakwater m
H 1. wave height m
2. total head m
3. excess “pressure” against impervious layer m
77h incoming wave height m
He reflected wave height m
A, significant wave height (average height of 33% highest waves) m
Hr transmitted wave height m
i gradient -
ie critical gradient in filter -
I 1. slope -
2. volume of scour hole per m width mm
k 1. permeability in porous flow mis
2. wave number (=2n/L) Im
3. spring constant Nim
k, (equivalent) roughness of bottom m
Kp damage coefficient in Hudson’s formula -
Kr reflection coefficient (=He/H) -
K correction coefficient for stone stability on slope -
Ks shape coefficient in pile scour formula -
Kr transmission coefficient (=Hr/H)) -
Ku velocity coefficient in live-bed scour -
K velocity coefficient in stone stability -
KC Keulegan-Carpenter number (77) -
L 1. wave length m
2. bottom protection length m
3. seepage length m
Lo deep water wave length (=g7°/2n) m


LIST OF SYMBOLS 407
L. erosion length (“depth”) in beach m
m mass kg
mo area of wave spectrum m
M momentum kg/s?
n porosity of soil (=volume of voids/total volume, n=1-ps/p.) -
N 1. number of waves in Van der Meer formula -
2. number of stalks or stems of vegetation 1/m?
(0) size of openings in geotextile m
P 1. pressure Nim?
2. coefficient in parabolic beach profile m??
3. probability density -
P 1. permittivity geotextile l/s
2. permeability in Van der Meer formula -
3. power w
Pr failure probability -
qs sediment transport per m width m/s
Q discharge m/s
OQ percentage broken waves -
r 1. relative turbulence -
2. radial distance from centre of jet m
R 1. hydraulic radius m
2. strength (“résistance”) depends
Re crest height dam, relative to water level m
Ri wave run-up m
Ra wave run-down m
s 1. wave steepness (=H/L) -
2. distance from ship’s sailing line m
So wave steepness with deep water wave length (=H/(g7*/2z)) -
Ss 1. sediment transport m/s
2. damage level in Van der Meer formula -
3. load (“sollicitation”) depends
t time s
te time to reach equilibrium scour s
T 1. wave period s
2. turbulence period (averaging period) s
Tn mean wave period s
Tp peak wave period (where spectral energy is maximal) s
Tt significant wave period (average period of 33% highest waves) s
u velocity in x-direction m/s
ai velocity averaged in time or space mis
Me critical velocity mis
uy filter velocity mis
Un maximum velocity mis
uy bottom velocity mis


408 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
u, 1. return flow velocity mis
2. resulting velocity with waves and current mis
Uy wind velocity m/s
uo outflow velocity, start velocity m/s
a’ turbulent velocity fluctuation in x-direction m/s
ue shear velocity (=V 7p) m/s
v velocity in y-direction m/s
v% ship’s speed mis
v turbulent velocity fluctuation in y-direction mis
Vi limit speed of ship mis
w 1. velocity in z-direction m/s
2. width of soil layer in slip circle computation m
Ws fall velocity sediment mis
w’ turbulent velocity fluctuation in z-direction m/s
w 1. weight N
2. relative width between piles in wave reduction formula -
x distance along horizontal axis (in flow direction) m
y 1. distance along horizontal axis (perpendicular to flow direction) — m
2. eccentricity ship in canal m
z 1. distance along vertical axis m
2. water-level depression in primary ship’s waves m
distance propeller axis — bottom m
mae height of stern wave in primary ship’d waves m
Z value reliability function depends
@ 1. slope angle -
2. coefficient in Breuser’s scour formula -
3. coefficient inSellmeyer’s piping formula -
4. influence coefficient in reliability function -
B 1. slope of scour hole -
2. angle of wave attack -
3. relative distance from average value in normal distribution -
4. coefficient in wave impact — strength equation -
6 thickness of boundary layer m
Y safety coefficient -
n breaker index (=H/h) -
h berm coefficient in wave run-up -
” wave angle coefficient in wave run-up -
Y roughness coefficient in wave run-up -
A relative density (=(9—p.)/px») -
¢ geometry coefficient ship -
n water level in wave m
K von Karman constant ( 0.4) -
a 1. relaxation length in turbulence m
2. length of floating breakwater m


LIST OF SYMBOLS 409
A leakage length m
7 1. dynamic viscosity kg/ms
2. discharge coefficient -
3. statistic average depends
4. specific weight of geotextile g/m?
v kinematic viscosity (=y/p) m/s
é breaker parameter (=tana/Vs) -
Sn-1.0 breaker parameter related to spectral energy wave period Tin-1.0 -
Su breaker parameter related to mean wave period -
& breaker parameter related to peak wave period -
D> bulk density (density including voids) kg/m?
Pn density material kg/m?
BR density of sediment kg/m?
Pw density of water kg/m?
o 1. total stress in soil Nim*
2. standard deviation depends
3. stress in impervious layer due to wave impact N/m?
o grain stress in soil Nim?
t shear stress N/m*
t critical shear stress N/m*
o angular frequency in waves (=2n/T) V/s
¢ 1. angle of repose -
2. velocity potential m/s
3. piezometric head m
4. angle between waves and current -
5. angle between ship’s sailing line and cusp location -
y mobility parameter (=7/Agd) -
Ye Shields (stability) parameter (=7./Agd) -
a proportional to -
Greek alphabet
[lower case [CAPITAL [Name [lower case [CAPITAL [Name |
fa A alpha fy IN
[sp [Bete
[yr [gamma fo omit |
fo fa feta fe
[= [Efepsiton pmo
[ofthe fifo
[iota fs
fe [Kf kappa oh




References

Ph.D. and M.Sc. theses from Delft University of Technology

and other research reports from TU Delft

In this book several times is referred to Ph.D. and M.Sc. theses from Delft University

of Technology. All these theses are in full text easy downloadable from

http://Repository.tudelfi.nl. Search via the name of the author. To shorten the list of

hits you may select in “options” the additional selection criterion “dissertation” or

“thesis”. Also reports published as “Communications on Hydraulic and Geotechnical

Engineering” can be found via this link. Some of the other references are available via

http://repository.tudelft.nl/hydro.

Ariens, E.E. (1993) Relatie tussen Ontgrondingen en Steenstabiliteit van de Toplaag (in Dutch). M.Sc.
Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Battjes, J.A. (1974) Computation of Set-up, longshore Currents, Run-up and Overtopping due to
wind-generated Waves. Dissertation Delft University of Technology

Bijker, E.W. (1967) Some Considerations about Scales for coastal Models with moveable Bed. Delft
Hydraulics, Dissertation Delft University of Technology

Blom, P. (1993) On the shallow Water Equations for turbulent Flow over Sills. Delft University of
Technology

Boutovski, A. (1998) Stabiliteit van gestortte steen, M.Sc.-report Delft University of technology

Burger, G. (1995) Stability of low crested Breakwaters. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

De Boer, G. (1998) Transport van Stenen van een granulaire Bodemverdediging M.Sc. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

De Gunst, M. (1999) Steenstabiliteit in een turbulente Stroming achter een Afstap. Msc. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

Dorst, K. (1995) Wilgen als oeverbescherming in kribvakken (in Dutch). Msc. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

Hoan, N.T. (2008) Stone stability under non-uniform flow. PhD. Thesis, Delft University of
Technology

Hofland, B. (2005) Rock and Roll: turbulence-induced damage to granular bed protections. PhD.
Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Hooimeijer, R.H. (1997) Sedimentatie in natte stroken (in Dutch). Msc. Thesis, Delft University of
Technology

Jumelet, D. (2010) The Notional Permeability factor in the Van der Meer formula. Msc. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

Kortlever, W. (1994) Wave attenuation by using reed for bank protection. Msc. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

Klok, P.K. (1996) De verborgen kracht van het riet. . Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Lammers, J.C. (1997) Shields in de Praktijk. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Lemmens, R.J.M. (1996) Natuurvriendelijke verbetering van de zanddichtheid van klassieke zink- en
kraagstukken. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Oosthoek, J. (2008) The stability of synthetic gabions in wave action. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of
Technology


412 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

Sellmeijer, J.B. (1988) On the Mechanism of Piping under impervious Structures. Ph.D. Thesis,
Technical University of Delft, 111 pp.

Suiker, A.S.J. (1995) Inklemeffecten bij steenzettingen op dijken. M.Sc.-report Delft University of
Technology

Taal, M.D. (1994) flow and salt transport in mangrove swamps, comm.. on hydr. and geotechn. eng.
no 1994-06, Delft University of Technology. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Thiel, B. (2002) Behaviour of a falling apron made from ‘poorly sorted’ material

Tukker, J. (1997) Turbulence Structures in shallow free-surface mixing Layers. Comm. on hydr. and
geotechn. eng., Delft University of Technology

Van Breugel, R.H., Ten Hove, T.D. (1995) Steenstabiliteit bij horizontale Vernauwingen. M.Sc.
Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Van der Hoeven, M. (2002) Behaviour of a falling apron. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of
Technology

Van der Meer, J. (1988) Rock Slopes and Gravel Beaches under Wave Attack. PhD. Thesis, Delft
University of Technology

Van der Linden, M. (1985) Golfdempende Constructies (in Dutch). Msc. Thesis, Delft University of
Technology

Van Doorn, R. (2012) Bow Thruster Currents at Open Quay Constructions on Piles. Msc. Thesis,
Delft University of Technology

Van Gelderen, P.J.G. (1999) Het enkele steen model. M.Sc.-report Delft University of Technology

Van Gent, M. (1992) Formulae to Describe porous Flow. Comm. on Hydr. & Geotech. Eng, Delft
University of Technology, 92-2

Van Gent, M. (1993) Stationary and oscillatory Flow through coarse porous Media, Comm. on
Hydraulic and Geotechnical Engineering. Delft University of Technology, 93-9

Van Os, P. (1998) Hydraulische Belasting op een geometrisch open Filterconstructic. Msc. Thesis,
Delft University of Technology

Van Tol, P.T.G. (2008) Floating breakwaters, a theoretical study and preliminary design of a dynamic
wave attenuation system. Msc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Vellinga, P. (1986) Beach and Dune Erosion during Storm Surges. Dissertation, Delft University of
Technology

Wijgerse, F. (2000) Shields op de Helling? (Het Ontwerpen van een Steenbestorting op een Oever
onder Stromingsaanval). M.Sc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Xie Shileng (1981) Scouring Patterns in front of vertical Breakwaters and their Influences on the
Stability of the Foundations of the Breakwaters. M.Sc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Zoon, A. (2010) Hydraulic interface stability of sand underlying a single filter layer. Msc. Thesis,
Delft University of Technology

Zuurveld, J. (1998) Hoofdstroming contra Menglaag (De Invloed van een Menglaag op het Begin van
Bewegen van Bodemmateriaal). M.Sc. Thesis, Delft University of Technology

Other references

Ahmed, F., Rajaratnam, N. (1998) Flow around Bridge Piers. J. Hydraulic Engineering, vol. 124, no.
3, pp. 288-300

Antoine, F., Druelle, G., Perrier, H. (1990) Damage on geotextiles during rockfill placings. 4" Int
Congress on Geotextiles, The Hague, Netherlands

Ashida (1973) Initiation of Motion and Roughness of Flows in steep Channels, Papers IAHR-
Congress, Istanbul

Battjes, J.A., Groenendijk, H.W. (2000) Wave height distributions on shallow foreshores. Coastal
Engineering, vol 40, nr 3, pp 161-182 (See also the M.Sc. thesis of Groenendijk)

Battjes, J.A., Janssen, J.P.F.M. (1978) Energy Loss and Set-Up due to breaking of random Waves,
16" Int. Conference on Coastal Engineering (Hamburg). ASCE, New York (See also the
M.Sc. thesis of Janssen)

Berendsen, E. (1996) Dumping of rocks on geotextiles. / European Geosynthetics Conf., Maastricht,
Netherlands

Booij, N. , Ris, R.C., Holthuijzen, L-H. (1999) A third-generation Wave Model for coastal Regions.
J.Geophys.Res. C4 (104) 7649-7666


REFERENCES 413

Booij, R. (1998) Erosie onder geometrisch open Filter. Delft University of Technology, rep 2/98

Breusers, H.N.C., Nicolet, G., Shen, H.W. (1977) Local Scour around cilindrical Piers. J. Hydr.Res.,
15(3):211-252

Breusers, H.N.C., Raudkivi, A.J. (1991) Scouring. Balkema, Rotterdam

Buffington, J.M. (1999) The Legend of A.F. Shields. J.Hydr. Eng. 124(4): 376-387

Buffington, J.M., Montgomery, D.B. (1997) A systematic Analysis of eight Decades of incipient
Motion studies, with special Reference to gravel-bedded Rivers, Water Resources Research,
1999-33(8) 1993-2029

Calle, E.0.F., Weijers, J.B. (1994) Technisch Rapport voor Controle op het Mechanisme Piping bij
Rivierdijken. TAW-DWW-Deltt

CEM (2003) Coastal Engineering Manual, Engineer Manual 110-2-1100, US Army Corps of
Engineers, CHL-ERDC, WES, Vicksburg, USA

Chiew,-Yee-Meng, Parker,-G. (1994) Incipient sediment motion on non-horizontal slopes J. Hydr.
‘Res, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 649-660

Curia, Cur, CETMEF (2007) The Rock Manual, the use of rock in hydraulic engineering, publication
C683, 1268 pp, CiRIA, London

Coppin, N.J., Richards, I.G. (1990) Use of vegetation in civil engineering, Cir publication C708
(reprinted in 2007 as ISBN 978-0-86017-711-1)

Courage, W.M.G. & H.M.G.M. Steenbergen, 2007. Prob2B™: variables, expressions and Excel®.
Installation and Getting Started. TNO-report 2007-D-R0887/A, TNO Built Environment and
Geosciences, Delft. August 2007.

Crossman, M., Segura-Dominguez, S., Allsop, W. (2003) Low cost rock structures for beach control
and coast protection. DEFRA R&D Technical report FD2409

Crossman, M., Simm, J. (2004) Manual on the use of timber in coastal and river engineering, Thomas
Telford, London

Cur 161 (1993) Filters in de Waterbouw. CuR, Gouda

Cur 146 (1991) Methode voor periodieke Sterktebeoordeling van Dijken. Cur, Gouda

Cur 154 (1991) Manual on the Use of Rock in coastal and shoreline Engineering. CUR, Gouda

Cur 155(1992) Handboek voor Dimensionering van gezette Taludbekledingen (in Dutch). Cur,
Gouda

Cur 162 (1992) Construeren met Grond. Cur, Gouda

Cur 141 (1995) Probabilistic design of flood defences. CuR Gouda

Cur 200 (1999) Natuurvriendelijke oevers, aanpak en toepassingen , CUR Gouda

d’Angremond, K. (2001) Bed, Bank and Shore Protection II. Delft University of Technology

d'Angremond K., van der Meulen, T.. Schiereck, G.J. (1996) Toe Stability of rubble Mound
Breakwater. 25" Int. Conference on Coastal Engineering, Orlando, ASCE, New York

De Graauw, A.F., Van der Meulen, T., Van der Does de Bye, M.R. (1984), Granular Filters: Design
criteria. J. Wirwy., Port, Coast., and Oc. Engrg. 110(1), 80; also available as Delfi Hydraulics
Publication 287

De Graauw, A.A-P., Pilarezyk, K.W. (1981) Model Prototype Conformity of local Scour in non-
cohesive Sediments beneath an Overflow Dam. XLV JAHR Congress, New Delhi

De Groot, M.B., Bezuijen, A., Burger, A.M. (1988) The Interaction between Soil, Water and Bed or
Slope Protection. SOWAS-1988 Delft, Balkema, Rotterdam

Delft Hydraulics (1969) Begin van beweging van bodemmateriaal, report $159-1

Delft Hydraulics (1970) Begin van Beweging, report M 1048

Delft Hydraulics (1985) Hydraulic design criteria for rockfill closure of tidal gaps, vertical closure,
report M1741

Delft Hydraulics (1986) Hydraulic design criteria for rockfill closure of tidal gaps, horizontal closure
method. Evaluation report. Report $861/Q438

Delft Hydraulics (1988) Evaluatie Ontgrondingsonderzoek, report Q635

De Looff, A. ‘t Hart, R., Montauban, K., Van de Ven, M.F.C. (2006) Golfklap, a model to determine
the impact of waves on dike structures with an asphaltic concrete layer. 30” Int. Conference
on Coastal Engineering, San DiegoWorld Scientific, Singapore

Den Heijer, C. (2012) Reliability methods in OpenEarthTools, Comm. on Hydraulic and Geotechnical
Engineering 2012-01.

Detert, M. (2008) Hydrodynamic Processes at the Water-Sediment Interface of Streambeds, Disser-
tationsreihe am Institut fiir Hydromechanik der Universitit Karlsruhe (TH), Heft 2008/1.


a4 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

EN12956 (1999) Determination of the characteristic opening size. Euronorm, CEN

EN13242 (2008)Aggregates for unbound and hydraulically bound materials for use in civil
engineering work and road construction. Euronorm, CEN

EN13383 (2002) Armourstone, (1) Specifications, (2) Test methods. Euronorm, CEN

Forster, U., Van der Ham, G., Calle, E, Kruse, G. (2011) Technisch rapport zandmeevoerende wellen,
ENW technisch rapport

Fredsoe, J. (1992) Mechanics of coastal Sediment Transport. Advanced Series in Ocean Engineering,
Volume 3, World Scientific

Froelich, D.C. 92009) River bank stabilization using rock riprap falling aprons, River research and
applications, (25) pp. 1036-1050

Graf, W.H. (1971) Hydraulics of Sediment Transport. McGraw-Hill, New York

Griine, J., Kohlhase, S. (1974) Wave Transmission through a vertical slotted Wall, proc. 14th ICCE,
Ill-pp. 1906-1923, ASCE, New York

Hall, C.D. (1993) Robustness as an aspect of geotextile selection. Jnt. Riprap Workshop, Fort
Collings, USA

Hinze, J.0. (1975) Turbulence. McGraw-Hill, New York

Hoffimans, G.J.C.M. (1993) A hydraulic and morphological Criterion for upstream Slopes in local-
scour Holes. Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management, Road and
Hydraulic Engineering Division, Delft

Hoffimans, G.J.CM., Booij, R (1993) Two-dimensional mathematical modelling of local-scour holes.
J. Hydr, Research 31 (5), pp. 615-634

Holthuijsen, L.W., Booij, N., Herbers, T.H.C. (1989) A prediction model for stationary, short crested
waves in shallow water with ambient currents. Coastal Engineering (13) pp. 23-54.

Hudson, R.Y. (1953) Wave Forces on Breakwaters, Proceedings-Separate ASCE, no 113

Huis in ‘t Veld (editor) (1987) The Closure of Tidal Basins. Delft University Press

Iribarren, R. (1938) Una Formula para el Calculo de los Diques de Escollera. M. Bermejillo-Pasajes,
Madrid, Spain

Izbash, S.V. (1932) Construction of Dams by dumping of Stone in running Water. Moscow-Leningrad

Izbash, $.V., K.Y. Khaldre (1970) Hydraulics of River Channel Closure. Butterworth, London

Jansen, P.P. (1979) Principles of River Engineering, The non-tidal alluvial river. Pitman (republished
by VSSD Delft, 1994)

Jongeling, T.H.G., Jagers, H.R.A., Stolker, C. (2006) Design of granular bed protections using a
RANS 3D-flow model. In: Third International Conference on Scour and Erosion, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Jonsson, 1.G. (1966) Wave boundary Layers and friction Factors, /0" Int. Conference on Coastal
Engineering

Jorissen, R.E., Vrijling, J.K. (1989) Local Scour downstream hydraulic Constructions, [AHR-
Congress, Ottawa

Klein Breteler, M. (2008) Validatie steentoets2008, Deltares report H4846

Laan, G.J. [1981] De relatie tussen vorm en gewicht van breuksteen, rapport MAW-R-81079
(Rijkswaterstaat - Dienst Weg- en Waterbouwkunde)

Lawson, C.R. (1992) Geotextile revetment filters. J. of Geotextiles and Geomembranes, Vol 11, no. 2+
6

Le Méhauté, B. (1969) An Introduction to Hydrodynamics and Water Waves. Springer, New York

Meer, van der en d'Angremond (1991) Wave Transmission at low-crested Structures, Proceedings
ICE Conference Coastal Structures and Breakwaters, Thomas Telford, London, UK

Melville, B.W., Raudkivi, A.J. (1977) Flow Characteristics in local Scour at Bridge Piers. J. Hydr
Research, 15(4), pp. 373-380

Nakagawa, H., Nezu, I (1987) Experimental Investigation on turbulent Structure of backward-facing
‘Step Flow in an open Channel. J. Hydr.Res., 25(1), pp. 67-88

Paintal, A.S. (1971) Concept of critical shear Stress in loose boudary open Channels. Journal of
Hydraulic Research, 9-1

PIANC 99 (2008) Considerations to reduce environmental impacts of vessels, PIANC, Brussels

PIANC-MarCom report 113 (2011) The application of geosynthetics in waterfront areas

Petschacher, M. (1994) VaP 1.5 for Windows, User Manual, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Pilarezyk, K.W.(1990) Coastal Protection, Proceedings of short Course on coastal Protection, Delft
University of Technology, Balkema, Rotterdam


REFERENCES 415

Pilarezyk, K.W. (1998) Dikes and revetments, Taylor & Francis (Balkema, Rotterdam), 562 pp,
ISBN 90.5410.455.4

Pullen, T, Allsop, N.W.H., Bruce, T., Kortenhaus, A., Schiitrumpf, H., Van der Meer, J.W. (2007)
Eurotop Overtopping Manual, EA/ENW/KFKI (www.overtopping-manual.com)

Quynh, Vuong Van (2010) Effects on wave break, sea dike protection of the tree planting formula in
coastal salinity inundated areas. Paper presented at the Mangrove workshop, Ho Chi Minh
City, 2010

Rajaratnam, N. (1976) Turbulent Jets. Elsevier, Amsterdam

Rance P.J., Warren, N.F. (1968) The Treshold of Movement of Coarse Material in oscilatory Flow.
11" Int. Conference on Coastal Engineering, ASCE, New York

Raudkivi, A.J., Ettema, R (1985) Scour at cylindrical Bridge Piers in armoured Beds. J.Hydr.Eng.
ASCE 111(4):713-731

Reynolds A.J.(1977) Turbulent flow in engineering, Wiley, London

Rouse H.(1958) Advanced mechanics of fluids, Wiley, London

Rijkswaterstaat (1990) Waterbouw, Rekenregels voor waterbouwkundig Ontwerpen (in Dutch).
Bouwdienst Rijkswaterstaat

RWS (1985) The Use of Asphalt in hydraulic Engineering. Rijkswaterstaat Communication, no. 37

RWS/DHL (1988) Aantasting van Dwarsprofielen in Vaarwegen (in Dutch). Report M1115 XIX

Schiereck, G.J., Booij, N. (1995) Wave transmission in mangrove forests, Copedec IV, Rio de Janeiro.

Schiereck, G.J., Fontijn, H.L., Grote, W.V., Sistermans, P.G.J. (1994) Stability of Rock on Beaches,
24" Int. Conference on Coastal Engineering, Kobe, ASCE, New York

Schiereck, G.J., Fontijn, H.L. (1996) Pipeline Protection in the Surf Zone, 25" Int. Conference on
Coastal Engineering, Orlando, ASCE, New York

Segal, A., Zijlema, M., Van Nooyen, R., Moulinee, C. (2000). User Manual of the Defi
incompressible flow solver. Delft University of Technology.

Schijf, J.B. (1949) Influence on the Form and Dimensions of the Cross-Section of the Canal, of the
Form, of the Speed and the Propulsion System of Vessels. XVIJth PIANC, section 1, Subject 2,
Lisbon

Schlichting, H. (1968) Boudary-layer Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York

Shields, A. (1936) Anwendung der Aenlichtkeitsmechanik und der Turbulenzforschung auf die
Geschiebebewegung, PreuBischen Versuchsanstalt fiir Wasserbouw

Simons (1957) Theory and design of stable channels in alluvial channels, Colorado State Univ. rep.
CERS71DB

Sleath, J.F.A. (1978) Measurements of bed Load in oscillatory Flow. ASCE Journal of the Waterway
Port coastal and Ocean Division, Volume 104, NoWW4

Sorensen (1973) Water Waves produced by Ships. ASCE Journal of Waterways, Harbors and Coastal
Engineering Division

Sprangers, J.T.C.M. (1999) Vegetation dynamics and erosion resistance of sea dyke grassland, PhD-
thesis, Wageningen University

SPM (1984) Shore Protection Manual. US Army Coastal Engineering Center

Steendam, G.J., Van der Meer, J.W., Hardeman, B., van Hoven, A. (2010) Destructive wave
overtopping tests on grass covered landward slopes of dikes and transitions to berms, , 32”
International Conference on Coastal Engineering, Shanghai

Stive, M.J.F. (1984) Energy Dissipation in Waves breaking on gentle Slopes. Coastal Engineering 8,
pp. 99-127

Stoker, J.J. (1957) Water Waves. Interscience, New York, 595 pp.

Van Vossen, J., Verhagen, D. (2009) Handreiking natuurvriendelijke oevers, STOWA rapport 2009-
37, Utrecht

Stoutjesdijk, T., Klein Breteler, T., Johanson, H., Bezuijen, A. (2000) Advanced assessment of the
stability of existing revetments and design of new revetments 25" Int. Conference on Coastal
Engineering, Sydney, ASCE, New York

Sumer, B.M., Fredsoe, J. (2002) The mechanics of scour in the marine environment, World
Scientific, Singapore, ISBN 981-02-4930-6

TAW (1997) Technical report erosion resistance of grassland as dike covering (English version
downloadable from http://repository.tudelft.nl/hydro)

TAW (2004) Technisch rapport Steenzettingen (toetsing, ontwerp, achtergrond)

TAW (2002a) Technisch rapport asphalt


416 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION

TAW (2002b) Technisch Rapport golfoploop en golfoverslag bij dijken (also available in English:
Wave runup and overtopping on dikes)

Uijttewaal, W. (2003) lecture notes 5312, turbulence, TU Delft

Van der Wal, M. (1990) Heranalyse van M1155 onderzoeksresultaten (in Dutch), Delft Hydraulics
report Q902

Van der Wal, M (2000) Modeme rivierkunde, PAO-cursus, Delft

Van Hoven, A., Hardeman, B., Van der Meer, J.W., Steendam, G.J. (2010) Sliding stability of inner
slope clay cover layers of sea dikes subject to wave overtopping , 32"! International
Conference on Coastal Engineering, Shanghai

Van Rijn, L.G. (1984) Sediment Transport. J. Hydr. Eng. (110) 10 1431-1456 (110) 11 1631-1641
(110) 12 1733-1754.

Van Rijn, L.C. (1986) Mathematical Modelling of suspended Sediment in non-uniform Flows. Comm.
nr, 365, Delft Hydraulics, Delft

Van Santvoort, G. (1994) Geotextiles and Geomembranes in Civil Engineering, Balkema, Rotterdam,
595 pp

Veldhuijzen en Zanten, van (1986) Geotextiles and Geomembranes in Civil Engineering. Balkema,
Rotterdam

Ven Te Chow (1959) Open Channel Hydraulics. MeGraw-Hill, New York

Verhagen, H.J., d’Angremond, K., Roode, F. van (2009), Breakwaters and Closure Dams, VSSD,
Delft

Verhagen, H.J., Yap, J.T.L. (1992) Coastal zone management with relation to low investment
solutions, 2" PIANC-symposium for developing countries, Surabaya

Verhagen, H.J., Van der Hoeven, M., Thiel, B. (2003) A new view on falling aprons, Copedec VI,
Colombo, Sri Lanka

Verruijt, A. (1999 or later) Grondmechanica, college ct1091, Delft University of Technology
(http://geo. verruijt.net/software/GrondMechBoek.pdt)

Vrijling, J.K., Kuiper, H.K.T Jorissen, R.E., Klatter, H.E. (1992) The Maintenance of hydraulic
Structures. Coastal Engineering 1992, pp.1693-1705

Wang, X.K., Fontijn, H.L. (1993) Experimental study of the hydrodynamic Forces on a bed Element
in an open Channel Flow with a backward-facing Step. J. of Fluids & Structures, 7, pp. 229-
318

Weiden, van de, J (1989) General Introduction and hydraulic Aspects. Short Course on design of
coastal Structures, AIT Bangkok

Wemelsfelder, P.J. (1939) Wetmatigheden in het Optreden van Stormvloeden. De Ingenieur nr. 9

Wiberg, P.L.,Smith, J.D. (1987) Calculation of the critical shear Stress for Motion of Uniform and
heterogeneous Sediments. Water Resources Research, 23(8), pp. 1471-1480

Worman, A. (1989) Riprap protection without filter layers. J. of Hydraulic Eng, IAHR, vol 115 (12)

Zanuttigh, B., Losada, 1.J., Thompson, R. (2010) Ecologically based approach to coastal defense
design and planning, 32” International Conference on Coastal Engineering, Shanghai

Zdravkovich, M.M. (1997) Flow around circular Cilinders; comprehensive Guide trough Flow
Phenomena, Experiments, Applications, mathematical Models, and Computer Simulations.
Vol. 1. Fundamentals. Oxford University Press, Oxford


INDEX
D
damage level, 199, 251, 255, 407
A Darcy, 107, 108, 126
absorption, 161, 169, 200, 370 Darcy’s law, 107
abutment, 35 deceleration, 27, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 64, 66,
abutments, 3, 31, 40, 89, 90, 91, 383, 386, 387, 391, 73, 276
392 Delta project, 5
acceleration, 61 design point, 252
acceleration zone, 34 detached bodies, 36, 85
asphalt revetment, 291 detached body, 36
deterministic approach, 245, 246, 247, 249, 250,
B 252, 254, 255, 263, 266
backhoes, 333 drag force, 36, 49, 51, 57, 192, 195
backward facing step, 32, 34, 66 drainage filter, 129
backward-facing step, 32 drainage filters, 129
bed protection, 91 dune erosion, 186
bed roughness, 56, 58
berm, 164 E
berm reduction, 164, 165 Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier, 279
Bishop, 121 ecological infrastructure, 305
Bligh, 115, 116 ecosystems, 307
block mats, 208, 280, 333 energy cascade, 24, 44
blockage, 224 equilibrium depth, 83, 91, 96
blocking, 142 equilibrium scour, 88, 89, 101, 188, 189, 406, 407
bore, 149 equipment, 140, 275, 280, 284, 291, 332, 333, 334,
boundary layer, 27 336, 337, 342, 343, 349, 351, 352, 353, 354,
bow thruster, 233 356, 357, 369, 383, 395, 400
breaker depth, 162
breaking wave, 149 F
breaking waves, 14, 156, 158, 163, 172, 193, 194, faggot, 277
216, 217 faggots, 277, 278
breakwater, 5, 90, 105, 152, 153, 186, 187, 196, failure mechanisms, 11, 15, 203, 243, 261, 264,
199, 201, 217, 241, 242, 274, 294, 295, 329, 265, 266, 267
335, 336, 353, 354, 355, 381, 393, 394, 395, falling apron, 300, 301, 382
396, 397, 406, 408 fall-pipe vessel, 336
bridge pier, 3, 31, 36, 80, 91, 188, 284 fascine mattress, 277
bridge piers, 36, 283 fascine mattresses, 279, 283, 286, 312, 339
bulk density, 373 fault tree, 11, 15, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267
fault trees, 262
c fetch, 148, 159, 181, 182, 183, 327, 406
Chezy coefficient, 25 filter, 104
Chezy's law, 20 filters, 18, 104, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 135, 136,
Chezy-coefficient, 38 137, 139, 140, 144, 202, 312, 368
circular jet, 85 floating breakwaters, 171, 172
clamping mechanism, 205 flow separation, 8, 20, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 39,
clamshell, 334 43, 65, 76, 188, 386, 387, 389
clamshells, 334 flow slide, 262, 283, 391
clay soils, 75, 372 flow-slides, 100
clear-water scour, 80, 96 Forchheimer equation, 125, 133, 134, 136
clogging, 142, 143, 144, 145 Forchheimer-equation, 106
cnoidal, 151 free turbulence, 39, 44
coherent material, 48, 75, 76, 77, 202, 210 Froude number, 401
constrictions, 31, 89, 90, 387
continuity equation, 41 G
culvert, 84 gabions, 75, 77, 362, 371, 372
cyclic loading, 135 geometrical scale factor, 401
cylindrical piers, 87


418 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
geometrically closed filter, 130, 131, 132, 133, 136, leakage length, 190, 191, 203, 204, 205, 210, 211,
138, 140, 276, 281 215, 409
geometrically closed filters, 131 lift force, 49
geometrically open filter, 133, 134, 135, 145 limit speed, 222
geometrically open filters, 133 linear wave theory, 152, 159, 170, 171, 172, 176,
geotextile, 76, 99, 104, 127, 128, 129, 139, 140, 194, 223, 399
141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 202, 212, 275, 278, liquefaction, 100, 262
280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 289, 300, 311, live-bed scour, 80, 97
312, 317, 339, 343, 344, 345, 346, 359, 366, load reductor, 315, 317, 323, 324
368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 382, 389, 399, 406,
407, 409 M
geotextiles, 139, 366 macro stability of slopes, 120
grading, 360 Maeslant Kering, 275
granular filter, 104, 128, 130, 131, 133, 139, 140, maintenance, 11, 13, 16, 55, 58, 83, 91, 99, 101,
141, 143, 144, 210, 212, 281, 282 149, 198, 199, 242, 243, 251, 255, 256, 257,
grass, 75, 164, 165, 166, 168, 284, 292, 293, 298, 258, 260, 267, 288, 296, 298, 308, 309, 310,
312, 316, 323, 325, 326, 327, 328, 351 319, 332, 376, 393,
‘groundwater flow, 107, 108, 117, 265 mangrove, 319
groyne, 35, 36, 38, 63, 64, 68, 90, 91, 138, 187, mangroves, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324
286, 287, 288, 289, 294, 331, 350, 352, 353, Manning number, 25
377, 379, 380 mats, 76, 77, 99, 128, 208, 280, 285, 315, 316, 339,
groynes, 286, 294 340, 342, 343, 349, 368
mattress, 277, 372
H micro-stability of slopes, 117
heave, 114, 115, 126 mixing layer, 28
horizontal constriction, 31, 35, 40, 61, 63, 67, 68, mixing layers, 9, 28, 31, 81, 158
69, 79, 92, 93, 94, 387, 390 mobility parameters, 13
horizontal constrictions, 35 model test, 401
horizontal expansion, 34 momentum equation, 40
horseshoe-shaped vortex, 86 monopile wind turbine, 283
Hudson formula, 195, 196, 199, 201 Monte Carlo approach, 253, 266
hydraulic jump, 7, 9, 44, 45, 46, 66, 67, 149, 157,
158, 159, 160 N
Navier-Stokes equation, 41, 105, 150, 172
1 Nikuradse roughness, 25
impervious bed protections, 109 nominal diameter, 50, 55, 84, 360, 405
impervious slope protections, 110 non-uniform flow, 26, 50
incipient motion, 53, 67, 68, 70, 77, 133, 138, 155, non-woven geotextile, 367, 368, 369
210
inspection, 55, 256, 258, 260, 262, 291, 298, 327, oO
355, 379, 382 offshore breakwaters, 295
internal stability, 131 overtopping, 166
Iribarren number, 156, 209, 210, 211, 212
Izbash, 48 P
Paintal, 13, $4, 55,73, 81
J parallel system, 262
jet, 84 particle Reynolds-number, 50
jet scour, 84 peak period, 149, 156, 160, 180, 208, 394
jets, 9, 29, 30, 50, 84, 85, 97, 101, 230, 231, 232 permeability, 10, 76, 105, 107, 125, 129, 130, 131,
Jetty piers, 36 132, 133, 137, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144,
jute, 289, 311 145, 191, 195, 196, 197, 198, 203, 204, 205,
209, 217, 247, 298, 336, 369, 373, 374, 381,
kK 396, 406, 407
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, 43 permeability criteria, 141
permeability of geotentile, 142
L permeable core, 197
laminar flow, 23, 43, 107 Physical modelling, 401
Lane, 115 piers, 85
launching apron, 300 pile screens, 170, 288


INDEX 419
piping, 104, 114, 115, 117, 123, 124, 125, 126, 129, scour depth, 82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 92, 97, 98,
134, 140, 405, 408 101, 188, 189, 190, 258, 259, 283, 300, 315,
pitched stone revetment, 202 382, 390, 391, 392, 398, 406
placed block revetment, 190, 191, 205, 210 sea, 148
placed block revetments, 202 secondary wave, 220, 235
placed blocks, 76 secondary waves, 227
plane jet, 85 seepage, 104, 114, 117, 118, 119, 122, 123, 125,
plunging wave, 196 126, 129, 139, 380, 388, 406
pneumatophores, 320 Sellmeyer, 405
Poisson-equation, 255 series system, 261
porosity, 373 serviceability limit state, 15
porous flow, 7, 8, 9, 18, 104, 105, 114, 118, 123, Serviceability Limit State, 242
124, 125, 126, 130, 134, 144, 152, 192, 197, set-back line, 2
203, 204, 213, 215, 388, 406 shallow water, 180
prefabricated mats, 342 shear force, 112
primary wave, 220 shear stress under wave, 216
probabilistic approach, 245, 246, 247, 254, 255, shear under an impervious layer, 112
259, 266 sheet pile, 286
probabilistics, 244 Shields, 13, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 61, 62,
probability density distributions, 244 63, 64, 66, 70, 71, 73, 74, 77, 88, 134, 135, 189,
propeller wash, 220, 230, 231, 232, 236, 239, 240 193, 235, 381, 387, 389, 399, 409
protection length, 95, 97, 99, 114, 406 Shields parameter, 50
ship waves, 6, 164, 313, 319
Q ships, 220
quality assurance, 332, 355 shoaling, 159
quicksand, 100 shovels, 333
side stone dumping vessel, 336
R significant wave height, 149, 170, 179, 181, 248,
Rayleigh distribution, 149, 156, 161, 164, 180, 181, 406
399 sill, 9, 20, 33, 34, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 124, 128, 262,
Rayleigh-distribution, 179 264, 276, 277, 281, 383, 385, 386, 387, 388,
reattachment point, 32, 33, 65, 66, 71 389, 390, 391, 392, 405
reed, 3, 38, 169, 278, 309, 311, 313, 314, 339 similarity parameter, 156
reflection, 161 sinking method, 340
refraction, 148, 159 slide, 100, 258, 262, 283, 299, 391
retention criteria, 140 slip circle, 120, 121, 122, 261, 406, 408
return current, 224 sloping bed, 59 |
return flow, 220, 223, 225, 226, 235, 236, 408 soil characteristics, 372
revetment construction, 343 soil texture, 373
Reynolds equation, 42 spectra, 161
Reynolds number, 403 spectrum, 149, 161, 165, 171, 176, 177, 178, 179,
Reynolds stresses, 22, 24, 39, 40 180, 181, 201, 394, 407
risk, 242 split barge, 336, 353, 354
Risk, 242, 251, 252, 266 stability of protection, 126
Rotterdam Waterway, 275 stability parameters, 13
roughness, 95, 164 standing wave, 149, 157, 163, 169, 173, 174, 187
run-down, 163, 165, 166, 172, 206, 407 standing waves, 173
run-up, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 172, stoniness, 373
180, 202, 327, 335, 382, 407, 408 storm duration, 168, 181, 183, 200, 208, 213
streamlined walls, 39
s surf similarity parameter, 156, 161, 165, 172, 200
sandtightness, 141 suming wave, 196, 396
scale factor, 401 survivability criteria, 344
scour, 13, 32, 35, 37, 76, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, swell, 148
86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98,
99, 100, 101, 187, 188, 189, 190, 258, 259, 260, T
264, 275, 279, 283, 294, 300, 310, 315, 328, threshold of motion, 13, 53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 68, 81,
382, 383, 385, 386, 389, 390, 391, 392, 398, 196, 246, 247
406, 408 timber groynes, 288
toe stability, 201


420 INTRODUCTION TO BED, BANK AND SHORE PROTECTION
toes, 298 Vv
transitions, 76, 207, 284, 297, 298, 374 Van der Meer equation, 197
turbulence, vi, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, vegetation, 313
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, Venice lagoon, 282
46, 48, 61, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74, vertical constriction, 33, 40, 61, 65, 66, 68, 93, 389
77, 80, 81, 82, 85, 92, 93, 94, 95, 98, 99, 101, void ratio, 373
106, 107, 128, 137, 145, 158, 162, 172, 178,
234, 235, 236, 237, 239, 259, 275, 276, 381, w
387, 397, 407, 408 wall flow, 9, 24, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33, 40, 153
Turbulence Wall Pressure, 71 wall turbulence, 39, 44
turbulent flow, 8, 21, 22, 23, 24, 41, 42, 43, 44, 48, water pressure, 104, 112, 116, 120, 121, 126, 203,
51, 101, 107, 154, 176, 280, 382 243, 370
wave generation, 159, 181
U wave impact, 169, 213, 214, 326, 405, 408, 409
ultimate limit state, 15 wave spectrum, 176
Ultimate Limit State, 242 wave statistics, 149, 160, 180, 248
underflow, 66 weir, 63
uplifi, 113 willow, 277
uplift force, 203, 204 working conditions, 337


